# MAIN TEXT

## Further observations on LKB1/STK11 status and cancer risk in Peutz–Jeghers syndrome

### Abstract

Germline mutations in the LKB1/STK11 tumour suppressor gene cause Peutz–Jeghers syndrome (PJS), a rare dominant disorder. In addition to typical hamartomatous gastrointestinal polyps and pigmented perioral lesions, PJS is associated with an increased risk of tumours at multiple sites. Follow-up information on carriers is limited and genetic heterogeneity makes counselling and management in PJS difficult. Here we report the analysis of the LKB1/STK11 locus in a series of 33 PJS families, and estimation of cancer risks in carriers and noncarriers. Germline mutations of LKB1/STK11 were identified in 52% of cases. This observation reinforces the hypothesis of a second PJS locus. In carriers of LKB1/STK11 mutations, the risk of cancer was markedly elevated. The risk of developing any cancer in carriers by age 65 years was 47% (95% CI: 27–73%) with elevated risks of both gastrointestinal and breast cancer. PJS with germline mutations in LKB1/STK11 are at a very high relative and absolute risk of multiple gastrointestinal and nongastrointestinal cancers. To obtain precise estimates of risk associated with PJS requires further studies of genotype–phenotype especially with respect to LKB1/STK11 negative cases, as this group is likely to be heterogeneous.

### PATIENTS AND METHODS

Thirty-three index patients with PJS were ascertained through colorectal surgeons, gastroenterologists and geneticists within the UK. Clinical information was collected on all patients using a standard proforma and through access to patients' medical records. PJS was defined according to published diagnostic criteria (Giardello et al, 1987)–histopathologically verified hamartomatous polyps with at least two of the following: small bowel polyposis, mucocutaneous melanotic pigmentation and family history of the disease. Patients were asked to provide details of any cancer in first- and second-degree relatives. There was no selection of cases for a family history of cancer. Clinical information and samples were obtained with informed consent and Local Ethical Review Board approval in accordance with the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki.

Genomic DNA from PJS patients was isolated from EDTA venous blood samples using a standard sucrose lysis protocol. The search for germline mutations in LKB1/STK11 was performed using conformational sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE) as described by Ganguly et al (1993). Published oligonucleotide primer sequences were used to amplify each of the nine exons of LKB1/STK11 (Bignell et al, 1998). Any fragments showing migration shifts were reamplified and sequenced directly using the ABI Prism dRhodamine Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit and an ABI377 Genetic Analyser. For all samples with possible mutations, sequencing was replicated in forward and reverse orientation using an additional affected family member (or using the original patient if no other affected individual had been sampled) in order to confirm the presence of the mutation. A search for large-scale deletions in LKB1/STK11 was made by long-range PCR. Amplification of exons 3–8 of LKB1/STK11 was undertaken using the Expand Long Template PCR System (Roche Diagnostics, UK).

Nucleotide changes identified were coded according to the published sequence of LKB1/STK11 (Genbank accession numbers: exon 1, AF032984; exons 2–8, AF032985; exon 9, AF032986) and referenced to the Human Gene Mutation Database (http://archive.uwcm.ac.uk/uwcm
/mg).

A search of the literature was made using the electronic database MEDLINE (National Library of Medicine, USA) for additional mutations reported to be associated with PJS which were not referenced in the Human Gene Mutation Database. LKB1/STK11 protein sequences of Homo sapiens (GenBank accession number NP 000446), Mus musculus (NP 035622) and XEEK1 (Q91604) were obtained from the NCBI protein database. They were aligned using Clustal W (1.82) multiple sequence alignment program (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw/).

Statistical analyses were performed using the statistical software program STATA Version 6 (Stata Corporation, TX, USA.
http://www.stata.com). The 95% confidence interval (CI) of the estimate of the frequency of LKB1/STK11 mutations in PJS was estimated from the binomial distribution. The association between categorical variables was made using either Fisher or χ2 tests, and differences in the distribution of continuous variables were evaluated using the Mann–Whitney U-test. Estimation of cancer risks was made excluding cases that had developed neoplasms either before or at the time of presentation of PJS. Estimates of cancer risks were obtained from survival analyses and standardised mortality ratios (SMRs). SMRs for cancers were determined using life-table methods. Cases were considered at risk from age 5 until the date of diagnosis of cancer or date of ascertainment, censoring at age 65. Expected numbers of cancers were computed using age-, sex- and calendar period-specific mortality rates for England and Wales referenced to the International Classification of Diseases, ninth revision (ICD-9)–all cancers 140–208, cancers of the digestive organs and peritoneum 150–159 and breast carcinoma 174. Two-sided 95% CIs for relative risk estimates are based on the Poisson distribution. A P-value of 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

### Patients

Thirty-three index patients with PJS were ascertained through colorectal surgeons, gastroenterologists and geneticists within the UK. Clinical information was collected on all patients using a standard proforma and through access to patients' medical records. PJS was defined according to published diagnostic criteria (Giardello et al, 1987)–histopathologically verified hamartomatous polyps with at least two of the following: small bowel polyposis, mucocutaneous melanotic pigmentation and family history of the disease. Patients were asked to provide details of any cancer in first- and second-degree relatives. There was no selection of cases for a family history of cancer. Clinical information and samples were obtained with informed consent and Local Ethical Review Board approval in accordance with the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki.

### Mutational analysis of LKB1/STK11

Genomic DNA from PJS patients was isolated from EDTA venous blood samples using a standard sucrose lysis protocol. The search for germline mutations in LKB1/STK11 was performed using conformational sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE) as described by Ganguly et al (1993). Published oligonucleotide primer sequences were used to amplify each of the nine exons of LKB1/STK11 (Bignell et al, 1998). Any fragments showing migration shifts were reamplified and sequenced directly using the ABI Prism dRhodamine Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit and an ABI377 Genetic Analyser. For all samples with possible mutations, sequencing was replicated in forward and reverse orientation using an additional affected family member (or using the original patient if no other affected individual had been sampled) in order to confirm the presence of the mutation. A search for large-scale deletions in LKB1/STK11 was made by long-range PCR. Amplification of exons 3–8 of LKB1/STK11 was undertaken using the Expand Long Template PCR System (Roche Diagnostics, UK).

Nucleotide changes identified were coded according to the published sequence of LKB1/STK11 (Genbank accession numbers: exon 1, AF032984; exons 2–8, AF032985; exon 9, AF032986) and referenced to the Human Gene Mutation Database (http://archive.uwcm.ac.uk/uwcm
/mg).

A search of the literature was made using the electronic database MEDLINE (National Library of Medicine, USA) for additional mutations reported to be associated with PJS which were not referenced in the Human Gene Mutation Database. LKB1/STK11 protein sequences of Homo sapiens (GenBank accession number NP 000446), Mus musculus (NP 035622) and XEEK1 (Q91604) were obtained from the NCBI protein database. They were aligned using Clustal W (1.82) multiple sequence alignment program (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw/).

### Statistical analyses

Statistical analyses were performed using the statistical software program STATA Version 6 (Stata Corporation, TX, USA.
http://www.stata.com). The 95% confidence interval (CI) of the estimate of the frequency of LKB1/STK11 mutations in PJS was estimated from the binomial distribution. The association between categorical variables was made using either Fisher or χ2 tests, and differences in the distribution of continuous variables were evaluated using the Mann–Whitney U-test. Estimation of cancer risks was made excluding cases that had developed neoplasms either before or at the time of presentation of PJS. Estimates of cancer risks were obtained from survival analyses and standardised mortality ratios (SMRs). SMRs for cancers were determined using life-table methods. Cases were considered at risk from age 5 until the date of diagnosis of cancer or date of ascertainment, censoring at age 65. Expected numbers of cancers were computed using age-, sex- and calendar period-specific mortality rates for England and Wales referenced to the International Classification of Diseases, ninth revision (ICD-9)–all cancers 140–208, cancers of the digestive organs and peritoneum 150–159 and breast carcinoma 174. Two-sided 95% CIs for relative risk estimates are based on the Poisson distribution. A P-value of 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

### RESULTS

Table 1
Table 1Family history, clinical characteristics and LKB1/STK11 status of index patients    LKB1/STK11 mutationClinical featuresCancerPatientSexAgeFamilial/sporadicExonMutationEffect of mutationAge at diagnosisPolyp site in GI tractIntussusception at age (years)Extra-intestinal polypsIndex caseRelativePJ77M23F1208G>TE70X13SB14——Mother cervix            Aunt colorectalPJ48M37S1180C>AY60X2SB, LB2, 7, 17, 24———PJ36F26S2335–337delQ112fsX177ST,SB,LB8, 9,15,20———PJ60F61S2368–370delQ123fsX616SB, LB16, 25, 55—BreastGrandfather stomachPJ52F34F3454C>TQ152X18SB, LB18———PJ56F40F3426–428delV143fsX1448SB, LB8, 18Vocal cords—Mother stomachPJ59F30F4470T<CF157S4SB, LB7, 14 ,27———PJ20F31F4580G>AD194N15SB15——Grandfather stomachPJ69F31SIVS5IVS5+1G>A?altered splicing18SB, LB21, 24———PJ24F48S5718–719insAS240fsX2620SB20, 33———PJ45F31F5725G>AG242E10ST, SB4, 19, 26——Father pancreasPJ47F31F6815–816insAY272X25ST, SB, LB25, 29———PJ51M38F6842–844delL282fsX54ST, SB, LB13, 14, 15,16,18,22,23,33,35,36———PJ42F35F6842–844delL282fsX510SB, LB30——Mother breastPJ35F39F7910C>TR304W16ST,SB16—BreastMother, grandmother breastPJ33M61SIVS8IVS8-2A>G?altered splicing31LB————PJ61M39SIVS8IVS8-2A>G?altered splicing19ST, SB, LB23, 32———PJ62F65F ND—13SB, LB13, 40Nasal——PJ25M56S ND—20SB, LB20———PJ40M39S ND—26SB, LB28———PJ01F39S ND—5SB19———PJ39M21S ND—11SB11, 20———PJ49F54F ND—22ST, SB, LB22 , 52———PJ55M41S ND—15ST, SB, LB15, 20, 34———PJ66F22S ND—5ST, SB, LB9, 20Ear and nasal——PJ67M35F ND—2ST, SB, LB2,12,13,14,18——Mother stomachPJ70F37S ND—3ST, SB, LB———Aunt breastPJ37F40S ND—38 ————PJ64M50S ND—5ST, LB7, 14, 26Pharyngeal——PJ68M44S ND—23ST, SB, LB23——Mother oesophagusPJ100F39S ND 27LB————PJ102M15S ND 6LB——Sertoli cell—PJ71M39S ND—34SB————ST=stomach; SB=small bowel; LB=large bowel. ND=none detected. Positions refer to the LKB1 cDNA sequence (Genbank U63333). details the clinical characteristics and family histories of the 33 index patients analysed. Of these cases, 13 were familial and 20 sporadic. Germline LKB1/STK11 mutations were identified in 17 of the 33 (52%; 95% CI: 33–69%) patients (Table 1), in exons 1–8.

ST=stomach; SB=small bowel; LB=large bowel. ND=none detected. Positions refer to the LKB1 cDNA sequence (Genbank U63333).

We cannot exclude the possibility that some mutations may have gone undetected; however, under test conditions, we have found that CSGE can detect all small insertions and deletions and ∼90% of single-base substitutions. In addition, we have examined for the possibility that some cases might harbour large-scale deletions in LKB1/STK11. It is therefore unlikely that we have failed to detect coding mutations, and, allowing for 90% sensitivity, the results suggest that the mutations in LKB1/STK11 account for at best 75% of PJS cases (the upper 95% confidence limit). Two patients carried the same mutation in exon 6 (PJ42 and PJ51) and two carried the same mutation at the 5′ splice site of exon 8 (PJ33 and PJ61). These four patients were ascertained from different centres and were not known to have any common ancestry. Nevertheless, as all are from the UK, it is probable that these mutations have a common origin, although identical LKB1/STK11 mutations without evidence of common ancestry have been reported (Hemminki et al, 1998; Resta et al, 1998; Wang et al, 1999; Westerman et al, 1999b; Ylikorkala et al, 1999). None of the patients studied were shown to harbour large-scale deletions of LKB1/STK11.

No significant bias towards mutations in exons 1 or 6 was observed, but no exon 9 mutations were identified. Seven of the 15 different mutations identified have not been reported previously–336delG (Q112fsX17), 369delG (Q123fsX6), 427delG (V143fsX144), 718_719insA (S240fsX26), G725A (G242E), 815_816insA (Y272X), IVS8-2A>G (altered splicing). In all, 11 of the mutations are predicted to lead to a truncated protein (four nonsense mutations, four frameshift deletions, one frameshift insertion and two splice site mutations). The other mutations identified were missense mutations, three of which have previously been reported to be pathogenic (Resta et al, 1998; Westerman et al, 1999b; Ylikorkala et al, 1999). All are nonconservative amino-acid changes that are highly conserved among human, mouse and Xenopus homologues of LKB1/STK11 and reside within the protein kinase core of LKB1/STK11 (Collins et al, 2000).

Table 2
Table 2Location of LKB1/STK11 mutations in PJS patients in this study and published reports. Also shown are the cancers associated with mutationsReferenceExon 1Exon 2Exon 3Exon 4Exon 5Exon 6Exon 7Exon 8Exon 9This studyaE70Xcx,co 112fs Q152X F157S 240fsIVS5+1Y272X K296XIVS7-2   Y60X 123fsb 143fsst D194N G242EpG>A282fsb E291VseA>G               R304Wb   iaE57X ex2_ex3       277fs 302del5 ex8 del  65fs del              E70X                L67P                Y60X                55fs                K84X                                iia     IVS3-1156_307 240fs Y252X           G>Ainvdel   280fs                      Iii        Q220X                        iv38fsIVS1-1  139fs   244fsIVS5+2Y246X       G>C       insTB247del                280fsX6                280fsX4                      va52fs   Q152X F157S 201fsIVS5+3263fsp 304fsp, sbIVS7-1W308X  K84Xb,cx, mm   137del4 N181Y Q220XA>T257fsco  G>Cco   R86X         248fso, th                280fsX6                      vi      175del2   262fs                G251S R304W                    viia50del4     D176N  IVS5+5 IVS6301fs W308C        191fs  G>A del    viiia          844insC co, p, prIVS6+3R297Sco, ut 971del6             G>CH272Yco, th                    ix54fsIVS1-2Q100X   D162N     R297K 331fs  51fsA>G    G163D           IVS1-1    L164M           G>C    D194N                          xaL67RIVS1+Y118X M136RIVS3-2L182PIVS4-2G242VIVS5+1263fs 303del3 319fs  Y60X b1117fs C132Xb, dA>G p A>T222fsG>A251fs      57fsG>A      212fs 281fs p, k      52del k       G242W 248fs                      xiY60X K108R   176fs   281fs    K416Xut   108del2                              xiia  ex2-7del d                              xiii IVS1-2      S232P E256A  P324L    A>C           342fs                   xiv41fs se     172fs p, o Q220X              157fs b         xv37fs  ex2 del  188fs 213fs                221fs                262fs                        xvia IVS1-2    Q170X           A>G te              asearch for large-scale deletions made.Mutation changes are described at the protein level.Key to cancers: co=colon; p=pancreas; pr=prostate; b=breast; cx=cervix; se=sertoli cell; ut=uterus; o=ovary; k=kidney; d=duodenum; te=testis.References: i, Hemminki et al (1998); ii, Jenne et al (1998); iii, Gruber et al (1998); iv, Nakagawa et al (1998); v, Ylikorkala et al (1999); vi, Resta et al (1998); vii, Mehenni et al (1998); viii, Boardman et al (2000); xi, Westerman et al (1999); x, Olschwang et al (2001); xi, Wang et al (1999); xii, Jiang et al (1999); xiii, Yoon et al (2000); xiv, Kruse et al (1999); xv, Miyaki et al (2000); xvi, Abed et al (2001). shows the positions of the mutations observed in our study and in previously published reports (Hemminki et al, 1998; Gruber et al, 1989; Jenne et al, 1998; Mehenni et al, 1998; Nakagawa et al, 1998; Resta et al, 1998; Jiang et al, 1999; Kruse et al, 1999; Wang et al, 1999; Westerman et al, 1999b; Ylikorkala et al, 1999; Boardman et al, 2000; Miyaki et al, 2000; Yoon et al, 2000; Olschwang et al, 2001; Abed et al, 2001). Overall, most mutations reported to date have been frameshift or nonsense mutations and thus result in a truncated protein. In-frame deletions or missense mutations appear to occur less frequently generally at conserved amino acids in the kinase core.

search for large-scale deletions made.

Mutation changes are described at the protein level.

Key to cancers: co=colon; p=pancreas; pr=prostate; b=breast; cx=cervix; se=sertoli cell; ut=uterus; o=ovary; k=kidney; d=duodenum; te=testis.

References: i, Hemminki et al (1998); ii, Jenne et al (1998); iii, Gruber et al (1998); iv, Nakagawa et al (1998); v, Ylikorkala et al (1999); vi, Resta et al (1998); vii, Mehenni et al (1998); viii, Boardman et al (2000); xi, Westerman et al (1999); x, Olschwang et al (2001); xi, Wang et al (1999); xii, Jiang et al (1999); xiii, Yoon et al (2000); xiv, Kruse et al (1999); xv, Miyaki et al (2000); xvi, Abed et al (2001).

Very few cases of PJS appear to be the consequence of large-scale deletions of LKB1/STK11; however, not all studies have systematically searched for such genetic changes (Table 2).

Disease expression in PJS is well documented to display inter- and intrafamilial variation (Burdick et al, 1982; Foley et al, 1998). Establishing a relationship between a number of the features of the disease and genotype is, however, inherently problematic because features typical of the disease are criteria for ascertainment. Nevertheless, there was no evidence that the ages at diagnosis are significantly different in carriers and noncarriers–mean ages of index cases, 13.9 y and 13.6 years, respectively. Furthermore, the distribution of polyps and rates of laparotomy were not significantly different between the groups.

Some previously reported studies have reported no association between detectable LKB1/STK11 mutation and family history (Hemminki et al, 1998; Wang et al, 1999; Ylikorkala et al, 1999). In our study, 13 of the 33 index cases had a family history of PJS (39%). Of these 10 were carriers of mutations in LKB1/STK11 (77%), but only seven (35%) patients with sporadic disease had mutations in LKB1/STK11. The higher prevalence of LKB1/STK11 mutations in PJS patients with a family history of the disease compared with sporadic cases is statistically significant (P=0.03).

Extra-gastrointestinal polyps are a recognised feature of PJS. Four of the patients in our study had extra-intestinal polyps: one of these harboured an LKB1/STK11 mutation and three did not.

Two patients had developed breast cancer since the diagnosis of PJS had been made–at ages 52 and 35 years. Both are carriers of an LKB1/STK11 mutation. In addition, one patient had presented at age 6 with a Sertoli–Leydig cell stromal tumour. He did not harbour an, LKB1/STK11 mutation. A high frequency of cancer was seen in the relatives of the familial cases–stomach (n=2, ages 32, 33 years), breast (n=2, ages 39, 51 years), colorectal (n=2, ages 43, 67 years), pancreas (n=1; age 50 years) and adenoma malignum of the cervix (n=1, age 43 years). All but the one case of stomach cancer was associated with LKB1/STK11 mutations. Excluding the case presenting with a Sertoli–Leydig cell tumour, the index cases and their relatives provided a total of 70 individuals with PJS from which cancer risks could be estimated. These individuals provided a total of 2120 years at risk.

The probability of developing cancer by age 65 years in all PJS patients was 37% (95% CI: 21–61%). The observation of seven cancer deaths, four from gastrointestinal disease, between ages 5 and 65 years, equates to the SMR for all cancer of 9.9 (95% CI: 0.4–20.4; P<0.001) and for gastrointestinal cancer of 24.8 (95% CI: 0.7–63.6; P<0.001). Confining the analysis to LKB1/STK11 mutation carriers, the probability of developing cancer by age 65 is 47% (95% CI: 27–73%), SMR of all and gastrointestinal cancers of 13.2 (95% CI: 0.5–27.1, P<0.001) and 32.0 (95% CI: 0.5–81.8, P<0.001), respectively. The risk of breast cancer in carriers was markedly increased, 29% by age 65 (95% CI: 12–62%); SMR, 13.9 (95% CI: 0.2–50.3, P<0.001).

### DISCUSSION

It is now well recognised that cancer risks are markedly elevated in PJS (Giardello et al, 1987,2000; Spigelman et al, 1989). Diagnosing PJS in the absence of mutation data, especially in those without a prior family history of the disease, can however be difficult as pigmentation may not always be present or can fade and polyposis is not always an invariable feature. Moreover, there is substantial phenotypic overlap with other syndromes such as Carney complex (Stratakis et al, 1998).

Over 75% of LKB1/STK11 mutations reported have been frameshift or nonsense mutations and thus result in a truncated protein (Hemminki et al, 1998; Jenne et al, 1998; Mehenni et al, 1998; Nakagawa et al, 1998; Resta et al, 1998; Jiang et al, 1999; Kruse et al, 1999; Wang et al, 1999; Westerman et al, 1999b; Ylikorkala et al, 1999; Boardman et al, 2000; Miyaki et al, 2000; Yoon et al, 2000; Olschwang et al, 2001). In-frame deletions or missense mutations appear to occur less commonly at conserved amino acids within the kinase core of the expressed protein. Mutations reported to date have been scattered across exons 1–8. The distribution of mutations within the protein kinase core encoding region of LKB1/STK11 does not appear to be random (P<0.05) and exons 1 and 6 appear to be preferentially involved accounting for ∼38% of all reported mutations. Only one mutation has been described in exon 9 (Wang et al, 1999)–a nonsense mutation removing 56 residues from the protein of 434 amino acids and as such resides outside the protein kinase core. Although the case was familial, other members of the family were not evaluated and hence the pathological significance of this mutation is questionable.

Our study showed that the risk for cancer, gastrointestinal and breast, associated with germline LKB1/STK11 mutations is high and supports recent implementation of screening protocols suggested for patients (Wirtzfeld et al, 2001). In contrast to a number of other inherited cancer syndromes, cancer risks associated with germline LKB1/STK11 mutations cancer risks are not so site specific. LKB1/STK11 functions as a tumour suppressor in hamartomous polyps and in neoplasms. Some neoplasms develop from hamartomas; however, as LKB1/STK11 has a role in a number of pathways involved in control of cell growth, it is likely that some mutations may confer an increased cancer risk through alternative mechanisms.

In our study, cancers were found in association with mutations in most exons. From studies published so far, there does not seem to be a specifically higher prevalence of any cancer associated with mutations in specific exons (Figure 1). However, one of the mutations we detected, R304W, appeared to be associated with a high risk of breast cancer. It is highly conceivable that certain mutations may be associated with higher risks of cancer at certain sites, as seen with BRCA2 (The Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium 1999; Murphy et al, 2002). To formally assess such relationships will require a large number of observations.

Since Hemminki et al (1998) first showed that germline mutations in LKB1/STK11 cause PJS, a number of studies have examined the prevalence of mutations in the syndrome. In our study, we identified the LKB1/STK11 mutation in 52% of our patients, implying that approximately half of the cases are not caused by mutations in this gene, reinforcing the suggestion that the disease is genetically heterogeneous. Other studies have reported similar estimates for the prevalence of germline LKB1/STK11 mutations in PJS patients (Wang et al, 1999; Westerman et al, 1999b; Yoon et al, 2000; Olschwang et al, 2001). Some mutations may have gone undetected such as those in regulatory elements which may be undetectable in some PCR-based assays; however, families with PJS unlinked to 19p13.3 have been reported confirming that the disease is heterogeneous (Mehenni et al, 1998; Jiang et al, 1999; Westerman et al, 1999b; Yoon et al, 2000).

Studies that have formally estimated cancer risks in PJS have not computed separate estimates according to LKB1/STK11 status. Olschwang et al (2001) recently reported a high frequency of proximal bile duct adenocarcinomas in PJS who did not carry LKB1/STK11 mutations. Similarly, Boardman et al (2000) reported a high frequency of cancer in this group of patients, although no cases of bile duct cancers were observed. In our study, we had few familial cases not caused by LKB1/STK11 mutations to enable us to compute a separate estimate of risk for noncarriers.

In conclusion, our results confirm that there is significant genetic heterogeneity in PJS. Future studies characterising the mutational status and disease manifestation in large numbers of PJS patients will allow better genotype–phenotype correlation to be made, which should assist clinicians in formulating cancer surveillance and individual predictive genetic testing.



# SUPPLEMENTAL FILE 1: 89-6601030a.pdf

# Preparing to download ...

[HHS Vulnerability Disclosure](https://www.hhs.gov/vulnerability-disclosure-policy/index.html)