# MAIN TEXT

## Genomic sequencing identifies secondary findings in a cohort of
parent study participants

### Abstract

PURPOSEClinically relevant secondary variants were identified in parents
enrolled with a child with developmental delay and intellectual
disability.METHODSExome/genome sequencing and analysis of 789
‘unaffected’ parents was performed.RESULTSPathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were identified in 21 genes
within 25 individuals (3.2%), with 11 (1.4%) participants
harboring variation in a gene defined as clinically actionable by the ACMG.
These 25 individuals self-reported, either: relevant clinical diagnoses (5),
relevant family history or symptoms (13), or no relevant family history,
symptoms or clinical diagnoses (7). A limited carrier screen was performed
yielding 15 variants in 48 (6.1%) parents. Parents were also
analyzed as mate-pairs (n=365) to identify cases in which both
parents were carriers for the same recessive disease, yielding three such
cases (0.8%), two of which had children with the relevant recessive
disease. Four participants had two findings (one carrier and one non-carrier
variant). In total, 71 of the 789 enrolled parents (9.0%) received
secondary findings.CONCLUSIONWe provide an overview of the rates and types of clinically relevant
secondary findings, which may be useful in the design, and implementation of
research and clinical sequencing efforts to identify such findings.

### INTRODUCTION

Whole exome and genome sequencing (WES/WGS) have proven to be powerful tests
for identifying clinically relevant genetic variation. The existence of secondary
and incidental findings has catalyzed debate regarding the types of findings that
should be sought by sequencing labs, the circumstances in which certain types of
variants should be returned, and the necessary extent of patient consent, education,
and genetic counseling. The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG)
released recommendations about the interpretation of variants in genes considered to
be clinically actionable, including those that confer a high risk of cancer or heart
disease. The ACMG recommends that these be sought and provided to patients that
consent to receive such results 1,2. Recommendations related to use of
specific gene lists and approaches for returning secondary findings were intended to
be used in clinical contexts, although it is also important to examine them in
translational research contexts.

Through a study that was part of the Clinical Sequencing Exploratory Research
(CSER) Consortium 3, we assessed
the utility of WES/WGS to identify genetic causes of developmental delay,
intellectual disability (DD/ID), and related congenital anomalies. We have sequenced
affected probands from 455 families, and have identified DD/ID-related
pathogenic/likely pathogenic (P/LP) variants in 29% of cases 4. As our DD/ID study includes
proband-parent trios, we have the ability to assess secondary findings in a sizable
cohort of adults 4.

We use the term ‘secondary findings’ throughout the
manuscript to describe variation identified via proactive searching 5 and report rates and types of
secondary findings in context of reported symptoms or family history. Our
experiences and data suggest the value of genomic sequencing in a clinical setting
not only for disease patients, but also for those not currently exhibiting an overt
disease phenotype. We demonstrate the utility of dissemination of such findings in a
cohort of parent study participants, and highlight this through case study
analyses.

### METHODS

There was no public recruitment for this study. Parent and children
(n=455 families) participants were enrolled at North Alabama
Children’s Specialists in Huntsville, AL. Consent was obtained for study
participation and publication of data generated by this study. Review boards at
Western Institutional Review Board (20130675) and the University of Alabama at
Birmingham (X130201001) approved and monitored this study.

We developed the Preferences Instrument for Genomic Secondary Results
(PIGSR) 6 to elicit
parents’ preferences for receiving categories of secondary results. This
instrument divides secondary findings into 13 disease categories (Figure 1). Results were returned only to participants
who opted to receive secondary findings. Decisions regarding disclosure of
secondary findings solely in the proband were based on a combination of parent
preferences for themselves and medical relevance to the proband during
childhood. In the case of adopted probands, preferences were solicited from the
adoptive parents on behalf of the proband.

At enrollment, a genetic counselor generated a three-generation pedigree
based on information provided by the parents/guardians of the proband.
Parents’ health records were not available to the study nor was a
physical exam performed. The genetic counselor asked questions related to family
history of cancer and sudden/unusual deaths of adults (e.g. cardiac arrest).
Cascade sequencing was not conducted as part of this study. We have (1) retained
the language used by the participant to describe their phenotypes or family
histories and (2) included any reported information that is plausibly related to
the phenotype of concern.

Participants that received secondary findings were scheduled for private
disclosure with a medical geneticist and genetic counselor. The clinical
significance of findings was addressed and documents detailing variant
information and relevant resources were provided. Secondary findings were not by
default placed in the participant’s medical record and no formal
referrals to relevant specialists were made. If the participants chose to share
results with their healthcare provider, formal referrals were coordinated.

Further details regarding WES/WGS, read alignment, variant calling,
filtering, classification, and validation can be found in our previous report
4 and in Supplemental Methods.
Briefly, we searched for: P/LP variation in ACMG genes1,2;
P/LP variation in ClinVar outside of ACMG genes; recessive variation in
individuals who harbored two or more P/LP variants in the same gene; variation
in which both parents of a pair harbored P/LP variation for the same recessive
disorder (defined in OMIM); and carrier status information in CFTR,
HEXA, and HBB. Only P/LP variants were
returned.

Identified variants in parent participants have been shared through
ClinVar and dbGaP, with consent. Additional information is provided in Supplemental Methods.

### Study participant population

There was no public recruitment for this study. Parent and children
(n=455 families) participants were enrolled at North Alabama
Children’s Specialists in Huntsville, AL. Consent was obtained for study
participation and publication of data generated by this study. Review boards at
Western Institutional Review Board (20130675) and the University of Alabama at
Birmingham (X130201001) approved and monitored this study.

### Patient preferences and consent

We developed the Preferences Instrument for Genomic Secondary Results
(PIGSR) 6 to elicit
parents’ preferences for receiving categories of secondary results. This
instrument divides secondary findings into 13 disease categories (Figure 1). Results were returned only to participants
who opted to receive secondary findings. Decisions regarding disclosure of
secondary findings solely in the proband were based on a combination of parent
preferences for themselves and medical relevance to the proband during
childhood. In the case of adopted probands, preferences were solicited from the
adoptive parents on behalf of the proband.

### Phenotyping

At enrollment, a genetic counselor generated a three-generation pedigree
based on information provided by the parents/guardians of the proband.
Parents’ health records were not available to the study nor was a
physical exam performed. The genetic counselor asked questions related to family
history of cancer and sudden/unusual deaths of adults (e.g. cardiac arrest).
Cascade sequencing was not conducted as part of this study. We have (1) retained
the language used by the participant to describe their phenotypes or family
histories and (2) included any reported information that is plausibly related to
the phenotype of concern.

### Return of results

Participants that received secondary findings were scheduled for private
disclosure with a medical geneticist and genetic counselor. The clinical
significance of findings was addressed and documents detailing variant
information and relevant resources were provided. Secondary findings were not by
default placed in the participant’s medical record and no formal
referrals to relevant specialists were made. If the participants chose to share
results with their healthcare provider, formal referrals were coordinated.

### Sequencing and variant information

Further details regarding WES/WGS, read alignment, variant calling,
filtering, classification, and validation can be found in our previous report
4 and in Supplemental Methods.
Briefly, we searched for: P/LP variation in ACMG genes1,2;
P/LP variation in ClinVar outside of ACMG genes; recessive variation in
individuals who harbored two or more P/LP variants in the same gene; variation
in which both parents of a pair harbored P/LP variation for the same recessive
disorder (defined in OMIM); and carrier status information in CFTR,
HEXA, and HBB. Only P/LP variants were
returned.

### Data sharing

Identified variants in parent participants have been shared through
ClinVar and dbGaP, with consent. Additional information is provided in Supplemental Methods.

### RESULTS

Of 455 enrolled families, 424 included at least one parent, and both
parents were available for 365 families. Demographics for the 789 parent
participants are reported in Table 1. The
study population had a mean age of 41 years and included 422 females and 367
males. 80.5% self-reported to be of European ancestry
(“White”), 8.5% as African-American
(“Black”), and 8.2% as “Other or
Multiracial”. Over 25% had a high school diploma or less, while
34.5% reported some college education (Table 1).

One goal of our study was to understand preferences as they relate to
receiving secondary findings across various disease categories 6. 85% of parents
requested all secondary findings, while 1.6% declined to receive all
findings. The most frequently requested category was risk for gender-specific
cancers (breast, ovarian, testicular and prostate; n=584,
96.1%). The least frequently requested result was risk for developing
obesity (n=542, 89.2%) (Figure
1).

We conducted a limited carrier screen for variants relevant to cystic
fibrosis (CFTR, MIM: 219700), beta-thalassemia
(HBB, MIM: 613985), sickle cell disease
(HBB, MIM: 603903), and Tay-Sachs disease
(HEXA, MIM: 272800), which are among the most common
Mendelian diseases (average carrier risk is 1/40) 7–9. We observed eight P/LP variants in CFTR
across 35 individuals (4.4% of parent cohort), four
HEXA variants across five individuals (0.6%), and
three HBB variants across eight individuals (1%) (Table 2; Table S2). Additionally, we
searched for cases in which parental “mate pairs” were both
carriers for variants in a gene associated with a recessive disorder that was
not relevant to the proband’s developmental disability (i.e., was truly
“secondary” relative to the reason for study enrollment). This
analysis led to three returnable results, including a parent pair with recessive
mutations in each of OCA2 (MIM: 203200),
FYCO1 (MIM: 610019), and
ATP7B (MIM: 277900) (Table S2). For the former two cases
(i.e., OCA2 and FYCO1), the enrolled probands
inherited both alleles and were affected by the given disease (see below), while
the latter family (ATP7B) did not have any currently affected
children.

P/LP variants were found in five individuals with a self-reported
previous clinical diagnosis but in whom a specific genetic cause was unknown. A
35-year-old female individual was found to harbor a heterozygous missense
variant in SLC4A1 (spherocytosis, MIM: 612653), and had family
history of related disease (Table 3;
Table S1). We
identified three missense variants (two likely in cis) in
SLC22A5 in a 37-year-old female with recessive systemic
primary carnitine deficiency (MIM: 212140). Finally, a canonical splice donor
site (D1) variant affecting PKD2 was identified in a
36-year-old female with polycystic kidney disease (MIM: 613095). This individual
also reported a family history of disease (Table
3; Table
S1).

Secondary genetic variation related to cardiovascular disease was
identified in two individuals with a previous clinical diagnosis and a family
history of cardiovascular phenotypes. One 30-year-old female reported to have
experienced cardiomyopathy postpartum, had a paternal family history of
arrhythmia, and stated that her paternal uncle suffered two “heart
attacks” prior to age 40. She was found to harbor a frameshift variant
in DSG2, a gene associated with arrhythmogenic right
ventricular dysplasia and dilated cardiomyopathy (MIM: 610193, MIM: 612877).
Although DSG2 has not per se been associated with peripartum
cardiomyopathy (PPCM), we find it probable that the variant explains her disease
history. The clinical symptoms of PPCM are similar to that of dilated
cardiomyopathy 10 and other
genetic variants associated with dilated cardiomyopathy are thought to be risk
factors for PPCM 11. In a
52-year-old male with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia, we identified
missense variation in ANK2, a gene associated with
ankyrin-B-related cardiac arrhythmia and long QT syndrome (MIM: 600919). It is
unknown whether this individual presents with long QT intervals. Additionally,
although not clearly related to ANK2 variation, this individual
also reported his father had ischemic heart disease.

Finally, six of the eight parents carrying P/LP variation in
HBB reported having sickle cell or thalassemia trait at
time of enrollment (Table 2; Table S2).

We identified secondary variants in 13 individuals with no previous
diagnosis or genetic testing despite the manifestation of disease and/or family
history (Table 3; Table S1). Given information
provided at time of enrollment, six of these cases (CLCN1, MFN2, BRCA1,
BRCA2, BARD1, PMS2;
Table 3) would have met criteria for
genetic consultation and testing via standard clinical guidelines 12,13. Given additional phenotypic information acquired at
return of results, two additional cases (SCN4A,
HARS;
Table 3) would have met such criteria
14,15. These eight cases are described
below.

A heterozygous missense variant in CLCN1 was identified
in a 29 year-old female who reported leg cramps and restless legs beginning in
childhood. Variation in CLCN1 associates with myotonia
congenita (MIM: 160800) characterized by muscle stiffness. Her mother was
diagnosed with myotonia congenita when she was 10 years old and her maternal
grandfather had a muscle biopsy performed in his 30s due to presentation of
symptoms, including “stiffness” that occurred
“especially in cold [temperatures]”. In a
separate case, a heterozygous missense variant in MFN2
(Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) Disease type 2A2A, MIM: 609260) was identified in a
35-year-old female who reported balance difficulties and weakness since
childhood that has progressed to severe cramping, myalgia, and numbness most
prominently in lower extremities. Her family history is notable for
neuromuscular disorder, with similar symptoms present in her brother, father,
paternal grandmother, and paternal aunt. Though a clinician has not formally
evaluated her, she reported that her brother was diagnosed with CMT.

We also identified cancer risk variants in individuals who report a
family history of cancer. We identified a frameshift variant in
BRCA1 (familial breast/ovarian cancer, MIM: 604370) in a
40-year-old male whose mother was diagnosed with breast cancer in her thirties.
In another case, a canonical splice acceptor variant of BRCA2
(familial breast/ovarian cancer, MIM: 612555) was identified in a 38-year-old
female who had a history of breast cancer on both sides of the family - paternal
grandmother (unknown age) and maternal grandfather (age 60). A frameshift
variant in BARD1 (MIM: 114480) was identified in a 33-year-old
female whose maternal grandmother had bladder, lung, and peritoneal cancer as
well as a great-grandmother diagnosed with breast cancer in her fifties.
Additionally, a frameshift variant in PMS2 (hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer; MIM: 614337) was identified in a 43-year-old
male with a family history of colon cancer - father (sixties) and paternal aunt
(forties). This individual also had a paternal aunt and grandmother who were
diagnosed with breast cancer in their sixties and fifties, respectively. After
receipt of this finding, the study participant followed-up with a colonoscopy,
found to be negative. He reports that he will continue periodic assessment.

Secondary variants were also identified in two symptomatic individuals
who were not aware that their symptoms were unusual and thus never had clinical
or genetic evaluation (Table 3). At
enrollment, neither individual reported relevant phenotypes to the variants
identified. In one case, a 28-year-old female was found to harbor a pathogenic
missense variant in SCN4A, implicated in hyperkalemic periodic
paralysis and paramyotonia congenita (MIMs: 170500; 168300), neuromuscular
disorders characterized by intermittent muscle weakness and/or myotonia. At
results return, she reported a history of painful stiffness during exercise that
began at approximately age five and that her throat “locks up”
after drinking cold liquids. Additionally, she reported that her eyelids
“stick” and “become heavy” throughout the day.
She noted that her mother displays similar phenotypes. This individual plans to
follow-up with a neurologist. In a second case, a 41-year-old male was found to
harbor pathogenic variation in HARS, associated with
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (MIM: 616625) characterized by gait difficulties and
sensory impairment caused by peripheral neuropathy. At return of results, he
indicated that he was “clumsy”, discharged from military boot
camp due to his inability to march in formation, and often wears out shoes
because of feet shuffling.

We also identified P/LP variants in individuals that are currently
asymptomatic and report no relevant family history (Table 3). Two unrelated individuals, a 52-year-old
female and a 50-year-old male, were found to harbor variation in
SCN5A (Long QT syndrome, MIM: 603830) and
DSG2 (dilated cardiomyopathy, MIM: 612877), respectively. A
31-year-old male was found to harbor a missense variant in
ACTN1, associated with a bleeding disorder (MIM: 615193).
Finally, P/LP cancer-associated variants were identified in four participants
with no personal or family history, including one in each of
MSH2, BARD1, BRCA2, and
RET (Table 3; Table S1). Notably, a
pathogenic missense variant (C609Y) in RET, associated with
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN; MIM: 171400), medullary thyroid
carcinoma (MTC; MIM: 155240), and/or Hirschsprung’s disease (MIM:
142623), was identified in a 52-year-old male participant who reported no
history of RET-associated cancer. C609Y has been observed in
many MTC-affected individuals and has been designated as level B risk from the
American Thyroid Association (level D is highest risk), with expected age of
onset of less than 30 years 16,17. Recommendations for C609Y
carriers vary but often include prophylactic thyroidectomy at a young age
18,19. However, more recent studies indicate
RET C609Y may have lower penetrance or later onset of MTC
than previously noted 20,21, consistent with the
observation of no related cancers in this family. Interestingly, while C609Y was
not transmitted to the enrolled, developmentally delayed proband, the family
reported that they have another daughter who has Hirschsprung’s disease
and is therefore likely to have inherited C609Y. The family was referred for
genetic counseling to test for the variant in the
Hirschsprung’s-affected daughter and it was recommended that both the
father and daughter follow up with oncologists.

For three enrolled children, we identified secondary variation not
inherited from a parent. Two individuals whose biological parents were not
available harbored pathogenic variation in CFTR (Phe508del) and
BRCA2 (Leu579*), respectively. Also, a six-year-old
female harbored a pathogenic de novo variant in
FBN1 (Asn2144Ser). At time of analysis, this proband did
not exhibit Marfan phenotypes (MIM: 154700), with exception of crowded teeth and
scoliosis. In three additional probands, compound heterozygous variation
associated with recessive disease was identified. Two P/LP variants, one
inherited from each carrier parent, in OCA2 (oculocutaneous
albinism type II, MIM: 203200) were identified in an eleven-year-old male and
his six-year-old brother; both presented with albinism. In a third case, a
nine-year-old female with cataracts was found to inherit a P/LP variant from
each carrier parent in FYCO1, a gene associated with cataract
18 (MIM: 610019).

### Demographics of study population

Of 455 enrolled families, 424 included at least one parent, and both
parents were available for 365 families. Demographics for the 789 parent
participants are reported in Table 1. The
study population had a mean age of 41 years and included 422 females and 367
males. 80.5% self-reported to be of European ancestry
(“White”), 8.5% as African-American
(“Black”), and 8.2% as “Other or
Multiracial”. Over 25% had a high school diploma or less, while
34.5% reported some college education (Table 1).

### Patient Preferences

One goal of our study was to understand preferences as they relate to
receiving secondary findings across various disease categories 6. 85% of parents
requested all secondary findings, while 1.6% declined to receive all
findings. The most frequently requested category was risk for gender-specific
cancers (breast, ovarian, testicular and prostate; n=584,
96.1%). The least frequently requested result was risk for developing
obesity (n=542, 89.2%) (Figure
1).

### Carrier status findings

We conducted a limited carrier screen for variants relevant to cystic
fibrosis (CFTR, MIM: 219700), beta-thalassemia
(HBB, MIM: 613985), sickle cell disease
(HBB, MIM: 603903), and Tay-Sachs disease
(HEXA, MIM: 272800), which are among the most common
Mendelian diseases (average carrier risk is 1/40) 7–9. We observed eight P/LP variants in CFTR
across 35 individuals (4.4% of parent cohort), four
HEXA variants across five individuals (0.6%), and
three HBB variants across eight individuals (1%) (Table 2; Table S2). Additionally, we
searched for cases in which parental “mate pairs” were both
carriers for variants in a gene associated with a recessive disorder that was
not relevant to the proband’s developmental disability (i.e., was truly
“secondary” relative to the reason for study enrollment). This
analysis led to three returnable results, including a parent pair with recessive
mutations in each of OCA2 (MIM: 203200),
FYCO1 (MIM: 610019), and
ATP7B (MIM: 277900) (Table S2). For the former two cases
(i.e., OCA2 and FYCO1), the enrolled probands
inherited both alleles and were affected by the given disease (see below), while
the latter family (ATP7B) did not have any currently affected
children.

### Secondary variants in individuals reporting a relevant clinical
diagnosis

P/LP variants were found in five individuals with a self-reported
previous clinical diagnosis but in whom a specific genetic cause was unknown. A
35-year-old female individual was found to harbor a heterozygous missense
variant in SLC4A1 (spherocytosis, MIM: 612653), and had family
history of related disease (Table 3;
Table S1). We
identified three missense variants (two likely in cis) in
SLC22A5 in a 37-year-old female with recessive systemic
primary carnitine deficiency (MIM: 212140). Finally, a canonical splice donor
site (D1) variant affecting PKD2 was identified in a
36-year-old female with polycystic kidney disease (MIM: 613095). This individual
also reported a family history of disease (Table
3; Table
S1).

Secondary genetic variation related to cardiovascular disease was
identified in two individuals with a previous clinical diagnosis and a family
history of cardiovascular phenotypes. One 30-year-old female reported to have
experienced cardiomyopathy postpartum, had a paternal family history of
arrhythmia, and stated that her paternal uncle suffered two “heart
attacks” prior to age 40. She was found to harbor a frameshift variant
in DSG2, a gene associated with arrhythmogenic right
ventricular dysplasia and dilated cardiomyopathy (MIM: 610193, MIM: 612877).
Although DSG2 has not per se been associated with peripartum
cardiomyopathy (PPCM), we find it probable that the variant explains her disease
history. The clinical symptoms of PPCM are similar to that of dilated
cardiomyopathy 10 and other
genetic variants associated with dilated cardiomyopathy are thought to be risk
factors for PPCM 11. In a
52-year-old male with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia, we identified
missense variation in ANK2, a gene associated with
ankyrin-B-related cardiac arrhythmia and long QT syndrome (MIM: 600919). It is
unknown whether this individual presents with long QT intervals. Additionally,
although not clearly related to ANK2 variation, this individual
also reported his father had ischemic heart disease.

Finally, six of the eight parents carrying P/LP variation in
HBB reported having sickle cell or thalassemia trait at
time of enrollment (Table 2; Table S2).

### Secondary variants in individuals reporting relevant symptoms and/or family
history

We identified secondary variants in 13 individuals with no previous
diagnosis or genetic testing despite the manifestation of disease and/or family
history (Table 3; Table S1). Given information
provided at time of enrollment, six of these cases (CLCN1, MFN2, BRCA1,
BRCA2, BARD1, PMS2;
Table 3) would have met criteria for
genetic consultation and testing via standard clinical guidelines 12,13. Given additional phenotypic information acquired at
return of results, two additional cases (SCN4A,
HARS;
Table 3) would have met such criteria
14,15. These eight cases are described
below.

A heterozygous missense variant in CLCN1 was identified
in a 29 year-old female who reported leg cramps and restless legs beginning in
childhood. Variation in CLCN1 associates with myotonia
congenita (MIM: 160800) characterized by muscle stiffness. Her mother was
diagnosed with myotonia congenita when she was 10 years old and her maternal
grandfather had a muscle biopsy performed in his 30s due to presentation of
symptoms, including “stiffness” that occurred
“especially in cold [temperatures]”. In a
separate case, a heterozygous missense variant in MFN2
(Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) Disease type 2A2A, MIM: 609260) was identified in a
35-year-old female who reported balance difficulties and weakness since
childhood that has progressed to severe cramping, myalgia, and numbness most
prominently in lower extremities. Her family history is notable for
neuromuscular disorder, with similar symptoms present in her brother, father,
paternal grandmother, and paternal aunt. Though a clinician has not formally
evaluated her, she reported that her brother was diagnosed with CMT.

We also identified cancer risk variants in individuals who report a
family history of cancer. We identified a frameshift variant in
BRCA1 (familial breast/ovarian cancer, MIM: 604370) in a
40-year-old male whose mother was diagnosed with breast cancer in her thirties.
In another case, a canonical splice acceptor variant of BRCA2
(familial breast/ovarian cancer, MIM: 612555) was identified in a 38-year-old
female who had a history of breast cancer on both sides of the family - paternal
grandmother (unknown age) and maternal grandfather (age 60). A frameshift
variant in BARD1 (MIM: 114480) was identified in a 33-year-old
female whose maternal grandmother had bladder, lung, and peritoneal cancer as
well as a great-grandmother diagnosed with breast cancer in her fifties.
Additionally, a frameshift variant in PMS2 (hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer; MIM: 614337) was identified in a 43-year-old
male with a family history of colon cancer - father (sixties) and paternal aunt
(forties). This individual also had a paternal aunt and grandmother who were
diagnosed with breast cancer in their sixties and fifties, respectively. After
receipt of this finding, the study participant followed-up with a colonoscopy,
found to be negative. He reports that he will continue periodic assessment.

Secondary variants were also identified in two symptomatic individuals
who were not aware that their symptoms were unusual and thus never had clinical
or genetic evaluation (Table 3). At
enrollment, neither individual reported relevant phenotypes to the variants
identified. In one case, a 28-year-old female was found to harbor a pathogenic
missense variant in SCN4A, implicated in hyperkalemic periodic
paralysis and paramyotonia congenita (MIMs: 170500; 168300), neuromuscular
disorders characterized by intermittent muscle weakness and/or myotonia. At
results return, she reported a history of painful stiffness during exercise that
began at approximately age five and that her throat “locks up”
after drinking cold liquids. Additionally, she reported that her eyelids
“stick” and “become heavy” throughout the day.
She noted that her mother displays similar phenotypes. This individual plans to
follow-up with a neurologist. In a second case, a 41-year-old male was found to
harbor pathogenic variation in HARS, associated with
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (MIM: 616625) characterized by gait difficulties and
sensory impairment caused by peripheral neuropathy. At return of results, he
indicated that he was “clumsy”, discharged from military boot
camp due to his inability to march in formation, and often wears out shoes
because of feet shuffling.

### Secondary variants in individuals reporting no relevant symptoms or family
history of disease

We also identified P/LP variants in individuals that are currently
asymptomatic and report no relevant family history (Table 3). Two unrelated individuals, a 52-year-old
female and a 50-year-old male, were found to harbor variation in
SCN5A (Long QT syndrome, MIM: 603830) and
DSG2 (dilated cardiomyopathy, MIM: 612877), respectively. A
31-year-old male was found to harbor a missense variant in
ACTN1, associated with a bleeding disorder (MIM: 615193).
Finally, P/LP cancer-associated variants were identified in four participants
with no personal or family history, including one in each of
MSH2, BARD1, BRCA2, and
RET (Table 3; Table S1). Notably, a
pathogenic missense variant (C609Y) in RET, associated with
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN; MIM: 171400), medullary thyroid
carcinoma (MTC; MIM: 155240), and/or Hirschsprung’s disease (MIM:
142623), was identified in a 52-year-old male participant who reported no
history of RET-associated cancer. C609Y has been observed in
many MTC-affected individuals and has been designated as level B risk from the
American Thyroid Association (level D is highest risk), with expected age of
onset of less than 30 years 16,17. Recommendations for C609Y
carriers vary but often include prophylactic thyroidectomy at a young age
18,19. However, more recent studies indicate
RET C609Y may have lower penetrance or later onset of MTC
than previously noted 20,21, consistent with the
observation of no related cancers in this family. Interestingly, while C609Y was
not transmitted to the enrolled, developmentally delayed proband, the family
reported that they have another daughter who has Hirschsprung’s disease
and is therefore likely to have inherited C609Y. The family was referred for
genetic counseling to test for the variant in the
Hirschsprung’s-affected daughter and it was recommended that both the
father and daughter follow up with oncologists.

### Secondary findings in DD/ID-affected children

For three enrolled children, we identified secondary variation not
inherited from a parent. Two individuals whose biological parents were not
available harbored pathogenic variation in CFTR (Phe508del) and
BRCA2 (Leu579*), respectively. Also, a six-year-old
female harbored a pathogenic de novo variant in
FBN1 (Asn2144Ser). At time of analysis, this proband did
not exhibit Marfan phenotypes (MIM: 154700), with exception of crowded teeth and
scoliosis. In three additional probands, compound heterozygous variation
associated with recessive disease was identified. Two P/LP variants, one
inherited from each carrier parent, in OCA2 (oculocutaneous
albinism type II, MIM: 203200) were identified in an eleven-year-old male and
his six-year-old brother; both presented with albinism. In a third case, a
nine-year-old female with cataracts was found to inherit a P/LP variant from
each carrier parent in FYCO1, a gene associated with cataract
18 (MIM: 610019).

### DISCUSSION

The ACMG estimated that secondary findings in genes relevant to a defined
list of actionable phenotypes would be found in ~1% of sequenced individuals
1,2. We observed variation in ACMG-defined genes in 1.4%
of parent participants, consistent with that estimate and the
1%–5.6% reported by other laboratories 22–25.

Our study assessed carrier status in all participants for only three genes,
HBB, HEXA, and CFTR, leading to the
identification of P/LP variation in ~6.1% of parent
participants. These genes were selected based on their anticipated frequencies in
the population sampled and our desire to balance yield with analytical and cost
burden. Had we assessed all genes known to associate with recessive disease
26, the burden of analysis
would have increased substantially 27,28. Further,
expanded carrier screening and discovery efforts would have increased Sanger
validation costs and the time required from genetic counselors and medical
geneticists for return of results. Thus, while our choice of genes as targets for
carrier analysis was semi-arbitrary, it imposed minimal analytical burden and led to
a substantial but manageable yield relevant to a few of the most prevalent Mendelian
diseases.

One additional more comprehensive carrier status strategy we used was to
search within both parents of a parental pair for P/LP variants in the same gene
(expanding beyond CFTR, HBB and HEXA to include
all genes associated with recessive disease in OMIM). Of the 365 parental pairs
enrolled, recessive disease risk (i.e., 25% for their children) was
identified in three (0.8% of parental pairs). This rate is likely to grow in
the future as additional evidence accrues on the pathogenicity of variants in genes
causing recessive disorders 22.
The treatment of parental pairs as units of analysis for carrier status is an
effective way to minimize analytical and cost burden and yet effectively capture
those carrier results likely to have the greatest potential impact.

Copy-number variation (CNV) was not explored in parents as a source of
secondary findings. This decision was driven by the considerable manual scrutiny
that is required to evaluate the technical quality of CNVs, the costs and challenges
of CNV validation, and the relative lack of robust CNV population frequency data,
particularly for smaller events. Analyses of CNVs as secondary variation may be of
interest to future efforts to increase the yield of medically relevant information
from sequencing data.

The question of whether patients and research participants need to be
offered choices about receiving secondary findings has been debated, especially
after the release of ACMG’s original secondary findings recommendations
in 2013 1. Multiple studies
have documented that most participants want most, and usually all, possible
secondary findings. This trend is consistent between studies asking this
question as a hypothetical 29–33 or to
inform actual return of results 34–37.
Consistent with these previous studies, the vast majority (84.8%) of
parents participating in our study chose to receive all categories of secondary
results. However, a minor but substantial fraction of participants
(15.2%) declined at least one category and 1.6% declined all
secondary results. One of the secondary findings listed in Table 3 was not returned because the parent had
declined the relevant category.

One of the most challenging tasks when analyzing secondary findings is
interpretation of genetic variation, particularly for variants that have not
been previously described in scientific literature or in clinical genetic
databases. Even variants previously reported to be pathogenic are often
supported only by weak evidence or conversely associated with strong evidence
for being benign 38.
Interpretation is made even more challenging when an individual harbors
potential disease-associated variation but does not present with the associated
phenotype or have a family history of disease. That said, in this study, ACMG
evidence codes were assigned and variants that were deemed to be P/LP were
offered for return regardless of the presence or absence of any particular
phenotype or family history. Even for those with indications of disease, the
particular phenotypes reported (Table 3)
are not necessarily directly related to the presence of the given variant.
Imprecision and incompleteness of self-reported diseases and family histories
and limitations to knowledge of penetrance and expressivity for any given gene,
and especially any given variant, all make interpretation more challenging. More
precise phenotyping and partnership with referring physicians would be
beneficial for laboratories attempting to interpret identified variants.

The secondary genetic findings that we identified may be of considerable
utility to the parent participants. For five individuals, we were able to
confirm, and genetically explain, a previous clinical diagnosis (Table 3). Such information may prove useful for
future clinical management and in discussions with family members that may carry
the same variant. Secondary genetic findings were also identified in 13
individuals who reported family history or symptoms that are likely to associate
with the detected variant. As described in the results section, genetic
counseling and testing could/should have been offered in eight cases based
solely on observed symptoms and/or family history. Additionally, we identified
secondary genetic variants in four individuals who have an increased risk of
disease with modest but non-trivial evidence for disease (two cases of
KCNQ1; one case each of MYBPC3 and DDX41).
Through participation in our study, these individuals now have a better
understanding of their cause or risk of disease and are in position to better
manage that disease or risk of disease.

We also identified secondary genetic variation in seven individuals who
report neither symptoms nor family history of disease (MSH2, RET, BARD1,
BRCA2, ACTN1, SCN5A, DSG2). These study participants appear to be
at increased risk of disease and it has been suggested that they to follow-up
with an appropriate specialist (Table 3)
in the hopes that actions can be taken to screen for, prevent, or mitigate
unobserved disease in these individuals.

Finally, we also identified secondary variation in DD/ID affected
probands that were not identified in parents, either due to unavailability of
parents, (n=2) or as a result of the variant arising de
novo (n=1). Further, three children from two families were
found to harbor compound heterozygous variation relevant to an observed disease
that was unrelated to their developmental disabilities (i.e. albinism and
cataracts).

Many parents in this study have experienced a diagnostic odyssey in
hopes of identifying the cause of their child’s developmental
disabilities. Individuals who carried P/LP secondary variants therefore required
counseling and recommendations for clinical follow-up regarding their secondary
findings, in addition to information regarding the care and well-being of their
affected children. Returning genetic information relevant to a new or unexpected
disease risk may be particularly problematic when no results are found relevant
to the primary indication for testing. In our study, 51% of the
secondary findings identified in the parents were transmitted to the
DD/ID-affected proband, and 56% of the 71 parents that harbored a
secondary finding did not receive a primary result for their enrolled
DD/ID-affected child. The lack of a primary result may increase the shock value
of a secondary finding. A parent may expect the conversation to revolve around
their child’s health but instead spends time discussing the meaning of
their own disease risk and/or an additional, unexpected disease risk relevant to
their already affected child. This fact highlights the potential financial,
emotional, and clinical implications of secondary findings that should be
clearly addressed in the informed consent discussion prior to sequencing so that
families are aware of all the possible outcomes of this type of testing.

Our study describes the identification and return of secondary variation
to parents who were subject to genomic sequencing for diagnosis of a
developmentally delayed child. Although the return of secondary genetic
variation has been debated 39,40, a large majority of parent
participants in this study opted to receive all identified secondary findings,
regardless of disease category, suggesting that participants are generally open
to receiving genetic information that may be relevant to their health. This
study demonstrates the utility of returning secondary variants, as it may
facilitate preventative screening for individuals who are genetically
predisposed to serious diseases. This information can also be useful to
individuals who have been clinically diagnosed with a condition but for which a
specific causal explanation is unknown. We have also shown that secondary
genetic information may lead to clinical diagnosis in individuals who have
experienced symptoms related to a disorder not previously diagnosed. Some
individuals also described significant family history that would have justified,
but did not lead to, genetic evaluation independent of their participation in
this study. Finally, our study describes a framework for identifying secondary
genetic variation in a broad yet manageable manner, including a limited but
productive carrier screen on only a few common Mendelian diseases along with a
more comprehensive screen treating parents as mate pairs. The methods and
results related to secondary variation identification may be of use to other
research and clinical laboratories that are conducting genomic sequencing.

### Patient preferences

The question of whether patients and research participants need to be
offered choices about receiving secondary findings has been debated, especially
after the release of ACMG’s original secondary findings recommendations
in 2013 1. Multiple studies
have documented that most participants want most, and usually all, possible
secondary findings. This trend is consistent between studies asking this
question as a hypothetical 29–33 or to
inform actual return of results 34–37.
Consistent with these previous studies, the vast majority (84.8%) of
parents participating in our study chose to receive all categories of secondary
results. However, a minor but substantial fraction of participants
(15.2%) declined at least one category and 1.6% declined all
secondary results. One of the secondary findings listed in Table 3 was not returned because the parent had
declined the relevant category.

### Challenges associated with variant interpretation

One of the most challenging tasks when analyzing secondary findings is
interpretation of genetic variation, particularly for variants that have not
been previously described in scientific literature or in clinical genetic
databases. Even variants previously reported to be pathogenic are often
supported only by weak evidence or conversely associated with strong evidence
for being benign 38.
Interpretation is made even more challenging when an individual harbors
potential disease-associated variation but does not present with the associated
phenotype or have a family history of disease. That said, in this study, ACMG
evidence codes were assigned and variants that were deemed to be P/LP were
offered for return regardless of the presence or absence of any particular
phenotype or family history. Even for those with indications of disease, the
particular phenotypes reported (Table 3)
are not necessarily directly related to the presence of the given variant.
Imprecision and incompleteness of self-reported diseases and family histories
and limitations to knowledge of penetrance and expressivity for any given gene,
and especially any given variant, all make interpretation more challenging. More
precise phenotyping and partnership with referring physicians would be
beneficial for laboratories attempting to interpret identified variants.

### Utility of secondary findings

The secondary genetic findings that we identified may be of considerable
utility to the parent participants. For five individuals, we were able to
confirm, and genetically explain, a previous clinical diagnosis (Table 3). Such information may prove useful for
future clinical management and in discussions with family members that may carry
the same variant. Secondary genetic findings were also identified in 13
individuals who reported family history or symptoms that are likely to associate
with the detected variant. As described in the results section, genetic
counseling and testing could/should have been offered in eight cases based
solely on observed symptoms and/or family history. Additionally, we identified
secondary genetic variants in four individuals who have an increased risk of
disease with modest but non-trivial evidence for disease (two cases of
KCNQ1; one case each of MYBPC3 and DDX41).
Through participation in our study, these individuals now have a better
understanding of their cause or risk of disease and are in position to better
manage that disease or risk of disease.

We also identified secondary genetic variation in seven individuals who
report neither symptoms nor family history of disease (MSH2, RET, BARD1,
BRCA2, ACTN1, SCN5A, DSG2). These study participants appear to be
at increased risk of disease and it has been suggested that they to follow-up
with an appropriate specialist (Table 3)
in the hopes that actions can be taken to screen for, prevent, or mitigate
unobserved disease in these individuals.

Finally, we also identified secondary variation in DD/ID affected
probands that were not identified in parents, either due to unavailability of
parents, (n=2) or as a result of the variant arising de
novo (n=1). Further, three children from two families were
found to harbor compound heterozygous variation relevant to an observed disease
that was unrelated to their developmental disabilities (i.e. albinism and
cataracts).

### Challenges of returning unexpected variants to families

Many parents in this study have experienced a diagnostic odyssey in
hopes of identifying the cause of their child’s developmental
disabilities. Individuals who carried P/LP secondary variants therefore required
counseling and recommendations for clinical follow-up regarding their secondary
findings, in addition to information regarding the care and well-being of their
affected children. Returning genetic information relevant to a new or unexpected
disease risk may be particularly problematic when no results are found relevant
to the primary indication for testing. In our study, 51% of the
secondary findings identified in the parents were transmitted to the
DD/ID-affected proband, and 56% of the 71 parents that harbored a
secondary finding did not receive a primary result for their enrolled
DD/ID-affected child. The lack of a primary result may increase the shock value
of a secondary finding. A parent may expect the conversation to revolve around
their child’s health but instead spends time discussing the meaning of
their own disease risk and/or an additional, unexpected disease risk relevant to
their already affected child. This fact highlights the potential financial,
emotional, and clinical implications of secondary findings that should be
clearly addressed in the informed consent discussion prior to sequencing so that
families are aware of all the possible outcomes of this type of testing.

### Conclusions

Our study describes the identification and return of secondary variation
to parents who were subject to genomic sequencing for diagnosis of a
developmentally delayed child. Although the return of secondary genetic
variation has been debated 39,40, a large majority of parent
participants in this study opted to receive all identified secondary findings,
regardless of disease category, suggesting that participants are generally open
to receiving genetic information that may be relevant to their health. This
study demonstrates the utility of returning secondary variants, as it may
facilitate preventative screening for individuals who are genetically
predisposed to serious diseases. This information can also be useful to
individuals who have been clinically diagnosed with a condition but for which a
specific causal explanation is unknown. We have also shown that secondary
genetic information may lead to clinical diagnosis in individuals who have
experienced symptoms related to a disorder not previously diagnosed. Some
individuals also described significant family history that would have justified,
but did not lead to, genetic evaluation independent of their participation in
this study. Finally, our study describes a framework for identifying secondary
genetic variation in a broad yet manageable manner, including a limited but
productive carrier screen on only a few common Mendelian diseases along with a
more comprehensive screen treating parents as mate pairs. The methods and
results related to secondary variation identification may be of use to other
research and clinical laboratories that are conducting genomic sequencing.

### Supplementary Material



# SUPPLEMENTAL FILE 1: nihms952080.pdf

# Preparing to download ...

[HHS Vulnerability Disclosure](https://www.hhs.gov/vulnerability-disclosure-policy/index.html)

# SUPPLEMENTAL FILE 2: PMC6185813

[File available at: automated_output/BRCA2/20251125_175029/pmc_fulltext/29790872_supplements/PMC6185813]

