# MAIN TEXT

## Cell-free DNA in the management of prostate cancer: Current status and future prospective

### Abstract

ObjectiveWith the escalating prevalence of prostate cancer (PCa) in China, there is an urgent demand for novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. Extensive investigations have been conducted on the clinical implementation of circulating free DNA (cfDNA) in PCa. This review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the present state of cfDNA as a biomarker for PCa and to examine its merits and obstacles for future clinical utilization.MethodsRelevant peer-reviewed manuscripts on cfDNA as a PCa marker were evaluated by PubMed search (2010–2022) to evaluate the roles of cfDNA in PCa diagnosis, prognosis, and prediction, respectively.ResultscfDNA is primarily released from cells undergoing necrosis and apoptosis, allowing for non-invasive insight into the genomic, transcriptomic, and epigenomic alterations within various PCa disease states. Next-generation sequencing, among other detection methods, enables the assessment of cfDNA abundance, mutation status, fragment characteristics, and epigenetic modifications. Multidimensional analysis based on cfDNA can facilitate early detection of PCa, risk stratification, and treatment monitoring. However, standardization of cfDNA detection methods is still required to expedite its clinical application.ConclusioncfDNA provides a non-invasive, rapid, and repeatable means of acquiring multidimensional information from PCa patients, which can aid in guiding clinical decisions and enhancing patient management. Overcoming the application barriers of cfDNA necessitates increased data sharing and international collaboration.

### Introduction

Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the most common malignant tumors in men. Recent data showed that the downward trend in PCa incidence and mortality is stabilizing globally. It could be attributed to a decline in prostate-specific antigen (PSA) screening and improved treatment [1,2]. However, 105 of 172 countries still have the highest incidence of PCa among men [3]. PCa is a disease closely related to factors such as geography, ethnicity, and socioeconomics, and epidemiological characteristics vary by region. Forecast data released by the American Cancer Society estimated that in 2022 there would be 268 490 new cases of PCa and 33 500 deaths from PCa in the United States, the first and second highest among men with cancer [4]. PCa incidence and mortality in China have increased significantly since 2000 due to a rapidly aging population and increased exposure to risk factors. Moreover, the average annual percentage change for incidence rates of PCa (7.1%) in Chinese men ranks first among all-male tumors [5]. It is predicted that in 2022, the incidence of PCa in China would rank sixth among male cancers, and the mortality rate would rank seventh [6]. In the face of the increasing number of morbidities and deaths, how to improve the early diagnosis rate and the treatment effect of late-stage PCa has become the focus of many researchers.

Initially, PCa usually does not show any obvious symptoms in older men. In most cases, prostate biopsies are conducted in patients with elevated PSA or a suspicious prostate nodule on digital rectal examination during physical examination [7]. However, PSA is a prostate-specific rather than a PCa-specific molecular marker. Prostatitis, benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), etc., can cause an increase in PSA and may also lead to an unnecessary biopsy. In the “diagnostic gray area” of PSA (PSA 4–10 ng/mL), the positive rates of diagnosis are only 25%–40%, which is likely to cause unnecessary invasive procedures. Detection of low-risk PCa may also lead to overtreatment [8]. Therefore, PSA is of low specificity, and more specific and sensitive biomarkers are needed to replace or supplement PSA for a better diagnosis and risk assessment.

The current “gold standard” for diagnosing PCa is a prostate biopsy, but this test still has limitations. Firstly, invasive procedures are more likely to cause complications in patients with poor health conditions; secondly, local sampling cannot fully reflect a patient's heterogeneity of tumors when they have multiple lesions [9,10]. Moreover, the continuous real-time monitoring of tumor progression and evolution is crucial for improving the clinical management of patients with tumors. In contrast, repeat biopsy is more invasive, and repeated imaging tests can be harmful to patients who are at low risk or under active surveillance. In light of these, it is necessary to develop liquid biopsy technology that can unveil the dynamic change during cancer therapy to complement current PSA tests or imaging.

Liquid biopsy technology can detect and analyze biomarkers (such as circulating tumor cells, circulating cell-free DNA [cfDNA], and extracellular vesicles) in the body fluids (mainly in blood, but also in urine, ascites, pleural effusion, etc.) of cancer patients, providing a more comprehensive genetic and epigenetic profile based on the patient's tumor genome map [11,12]. In addition to the advantages of non-invasiveness, simplicity, quickness, and repeatability, it is also suitable for real-time monitoring of tumor progression and evolution serially [13]. In the era of precision medicine, liquid biopsy has a very bright application prospect. cfDNA has been implicated in the clinical management of numerous cancer types [[14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19]]. As illustrated in Fig. 1, molecular information derived from cfDNA has broad clinical applications. This review will focus on the current research status of cfDNA in PCa and discuss its future application in the diagnosis and treatment of PCa.Figure 1An overview of the molecular information derived from cfDNA and its clinical applications. cfDNA is originated from apoptotic or necrotic cells. Neutrophils can also release extracellular traps as part of a controlled cell-death process. Alive cells are also able to release cfDNA actively. cfDNA shedding into blood stream, urine, or other body fluids can be used to measure its abundance, mutation status, epigenetic changes, and altered fragmentation pattern. cfDNA could be potentially applied in several clinical aspects, including screening, early detection, prognostic assessment, risk prediction of recurrence and metastasis. Future clinical applications also include monitoring treatment response, identifying mechanism of resistance and minimal residual identification. cfDNA, circulating cell-free DNA. This figure was created with BioRender.com (BioRender, Toronto, Canada).Figure 1

An overview of the molecular information derived from cfDNA and its clinical applications. cfDNA is originated from apoptotic or necrotic cells. Neutrophils can also release extracellular traps as part of a controlled cell-death process. Alive cells are also able to release cfDNA actively. cfDNA shedding into blood stream, urine, or other body fluids can be used to measure its abundance, mutation status, epigenetic changes, and altered fragmentation pattern. cfDNA could be potentially applied in several clinical aspects, including screening, early detection, prognostic assessment, risk prediction of recurrence and metastasis. Future clinical applications also include monitoring treatment response, identifying mechanism of resistance and minimal residual identification. cfDNA, circulating cell-free DNA. This figure was created with BioRender.com (BioRender, Toronto, Canada).

### cfDNA biology and detection methods

cfDNA is a fraction of circulating nucleic acid that exists mainly as double-stranded DNA in body fluids. It was discovered in peripheral blood by Mandel and Metais in 1948 [20]. In the past few decades, cfDNA was believed to be released mainly by apoptosis, necrosis, or active cellular secretion [21]. There is also some evidence that parts of the cfDNA population may be induced by the effects of chromosomal instability, which can cause chromosome segregation errors and the release of genomic DNA into circulation [22]. cfDNA is typically between 40 bp and 200 bp long, and most of the cfDNA found in healthy individuals comes from hematopoietic cells (55% white blood cells and 30% erythrocyte progenitors) [23,24]. The tumor-derived portion is considered circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA). The proportion of ctDNA in cfDNA varies widely, ranging from less than 0.1% to more than 90% [25]. Currently, there is no method to absolutely isolate ctDNA from normal cfDNA, and the tumor-associated features of ctDNA including point mutation, copy number variations (CNVs), and specific methylation patterns are of great importance to determine its presence and clinical application [15]. The ctDNA also has a distinct size distribution pattern compared to non-tumor-originated cfDNA [26]. The ctDNA has a modal size of 167 bp with an approximately 147 bp of DNA wrapped around a nucleosome and a 20 bp of linker DNA. Thus the enrichment of size-specific cfDNA (90–150 bp) may lead to the improvement in detection and identification of ctDNA variations [26,27].

There is no consensus on the physiological and pathological function of cfDNA [21,28]. cfDNA can act as a damage-associated molecular pattern to mediate immune regulation, and cfDNA in plasma can also function as an essential immune system regulator [28,29]. The release of cfDNA also helps to remove damaged DNA and maintain cellular homeostasis [30]. It is also possible for cfDNA to enter a single cell and be integrated into the genome, for example, to allow the cell to undergo functional transformation [31,32]; furthermore, cfDNA can also affect the tumor microenvironment and promote tumor growth [33,34].

Current studies of ctDNA mainly focus on its clinical application. Accordingly, the level of serum cfDNA may indicate the disease state of patients to some extent. The study by Leon et al. [35] showed that the total amount of cfDNA in cancer patients is higher than that in healthy people. In addition, the amount of cfDNA varies among different cancer types, different individuals, and different stages of tumors [36]. In addition, multiple tumor-specific genetic alterations, such as gene mutations, copy number variations (CNVs), chromosomal rearrangements, and aberrant methylation, can be detected by whole-genome sequencing of cfDNA [37]. Through the analysis of gene information carried by ctDNA, it can be used for early cancer detection, determination of tissue of origin, prognosis, monitoring of treatment response, assessment of potential resistance to treatment, or detection of minimal residual disease (MRD) [38] (Fig. 1). Given that ctDNA can reflect information on tumor burden and genetic alterations from multiple dimensions, research platforms based on ctDNA detection are being developed vigorously.

Previous studies have reported several methods for qualitative and quantitative detection of cfDNA [39]. There are currently three main detection platforms. Among them, real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has a higher detection threshold, which is not suitable for low cfDNA content. The sensitivity and specificity of droplet digital PCR detection are higher than real-time quantitative PCR [40]. Droplet digital PCR detection is more suitable for identifying pre-defined single-gene hotspot mutations; in contrast, next-generation sequencing (NGS) has higher mutation coverage, making sequencing at whole-genome level feasible [41]. NGS is by far the most commonly used method for cfDNA detection [42]. Deveson et al. [43] evaluated the ctDNA detection performance of five leading ctDNA assay platforms developed based on NGS across 12 clinical and research facilities. Above 0.5% variant allele frequency (VAF), all five assays detected ctDNA mutations with high sensitivity, high precision, and reproducibility; however, below this limit of 0.5%, detection becomes unreliable, making it a key challenge for ctDNA sequencing analysis. A recent multicenter study demonstrated that low-frequency ctDNA variants with VAF less than 1% help identify clinically differential genomic alterations in castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) patients to provide important clinical information [44]. These urge improvement in the sensitivity of detecting mutations below 0.5% VAF and the optimization of the pre-analytic factors including ctDNA enrichment, library preparation, and target capture.

Several factors could affect the translation of ctDNA detecting results into clinical practice. Recently a phenomenon called clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential (CHIP), termed the age-related acquisition of somatic mutations that lead to clonal expansion in regenerating hematopoietic stem cell populations has been reported to affect the detection of ctDNA mutation [45,46]. Jensen et al. [47] found the CHIP interference in approximately 10% of advanced PCa patients in the determination of DNA repair gene mutation, including ATM, BRCA, and CHEK2, thus may further impact the poly adenosine diphosphate ribose polymerase inhibitor (PARPi) candidacy identification. Since CHIP is also prevalent in noncancerous individuals, especially in elder people, this adds more uncertainty in cfDNA mutation analysis in PCa [46,47]. Collection and analysis of leukocytes in the cell pellet or leukocyte coating can detect CHIP; therefore, simultaneous detection of plasma DNA and leukocyte DNA is recommended to exclude false-positive results caused by CHIP mutation [48].

Epigenetic alterations in cfDNA appear to be more stable and homogenous with cancer origin, which makes the methylation profile of cfDNA a success attracting attention as an emerging target for research [[49], [50], [51], [52]]. Gene-wide interrogation of DNA methylation signatures, aided by machine learning, can enable the identification and classification of solid tumors; whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) is most commonly used to detect DNA methylation characteristics; Liu et al. [53] developed a classifier that can be applied to detect or localize cancer based on the cfDNA methylation information obtained by WGBS. Besides, cell-free methylated DNA immunoprecipitation and high-throughput sequencing (cfMeDIP-seq) enables genome-wide methylation analysis of plasma cfDNA without the use of bisulfite. The cfMeDIP-seq does not require the chemical treatment of DNA with bisulfite, which will significantly lower the cfDNA input [54]. Additionally, cfMeDIP-seq is relatively of low-cost compared to WGBS. In 2018, researchers found that as low as 1–10 ng of plasma cfDNA extracted from 1 mL plasma can be successfully used for cfMeDIP-seq analysis [55]. Next, Nassiri et al. [56] profiled methylated DNA fragments recovered from plasma based on cfMeDIP-seq to identify and differentiate common primary intracranial tumors.

Ultimately, with the deepening of research and the introduction of more sophisticated detection methods, cfDNA will continue to show promise in PCa management. In the future, cfDNA has a great potential of being incorporated into the pipelines of cfDNA in the clinical management of PCa (Fig. 2).Figure 2Proposed pipelines of cfDNA in the clinical management of prostate cancer. PSA test identified suspicious population from general population. Further cfDNA test discovered high-risk population. Biopsy-confirmed prostate cancer patients further underwent individualized risk assessment and treatment method selection. For active surveillance patients, cfDNA severed as real-time monitoring and helped to decide to continue active surveillance or be transferred to other therapies. cfDNA could warn early recurrence and cfDNA-guided precision medicine could identify key molecular alterations to guide clinical decision-making and long-term follow-up. cfDNA, circulating cell-free DNA; PSA, prostate-specific antigen. This figure was created with BioRender.com (BioRender, Toronto, Canada).Figure 2

Proposed pipelines of cfDNA in the clinical management of prostate cancer. PSA test identified suspicious population from general population. Further cfDNA test discovered high-risk population. Biopsy-confirmed prostate cancer patients further underwent individualized risk assessment and treatment method selection. For active surveillance patients, cfDNA severed as real-time monitoring and helped to decide to continue active surveillance or be transferred to other therapies. cfDNA could warn early recurrence and cfDNA-guided precision medicine could identify key molecular alterations to guide clinical decision-making and long-term follow-up. cfDNA, circulating cell-free DNA; PSA, prostate-specific antigen. This figure was created with BioRender.com (BioRender, Toronto, Canada).

### cfDNA in PCa screening and detection

Whether the abundance of cfDNA or ctDNA could be used in the early diagnosis of PCa remains controversial, while higher cfDNA levels or a higher proportion of ctDNA in liquid biopsy usually suggest a higher risk of PCa. The low abundance of cfDNA in early-stage cancers may limit its use in early screening and detection [57]. Hennigan et al. [58] applied ultra-low-pass whole-genome sequencing to profile cfDNA from patients diagnosed with localized PCa and patients with metastatic PCa. However, in this study, ctDNA was not detected in plasma from patients with locally advanced PCa before surgery or before biochemical recurrence, while ctDNA in patients with metastatic PCa can be detected by ultra-low-pass whole-genome sequencing. On the other hand, although high levels of cfDNA are less sensitive and cannot be directly used for definitive diagnosis, many studies showed that PCa patients have significantly higher levels of cfDNA than healthy controls [[59], [60], [61]]. In another study, patients with PCa had three times as much cfDNA in their plasma as those with BPH [62].

Great efforts have been made to use the cfDNA methylation marker to identify the tissue of origin in cancer and predict cancer risks [63,64]. Studies of circulating cell-free genome profiling for early detection of multiple cancers, including PCa, are being conducted in large-scale clinical trials [53]. In previous studies, it has been indicated that the methylation signature obtained by WGBS is superior to that of CNVs assessed by targeted sequencing in detecting cancer origins [65]. Moreover, the methylation signature can detect cancer with up to 99.3% specificity, and 93% of cancer cases can be correctly classified across different cancer stages [53]. In 2020, researchers reported the initial results of the development of PanSeer, a novel platform for analyzing cancer-specific methylation signatures [64]. In addition, through a large-scale retrospective study, PanSeer was shown to detect multiple cancer types (stomach, esophagus, colorectal, lung, or liver cancer) 4 years earlier before conventional diagnosis methods. Based on the research basis, the investigators will further evaluate the cancer-specific DNA methylation signatures to predict cancer and apply that to a large screening population in clinical trials [66].

DNA methylation is an epigenetic alteration known to be highly associated with tumors [67]. Numerous studies have confirmed that aberrant DNA methylation, including genome-wide hypomethylation that leads to genome instability and activation of silent oncogenes, and aberrant hypermethylation of sequence-specific CpG islands that activate tumor suppressor genes, are major contributors to tumor transformation [68]. Aberrant DNA methylation is generally thought to occur in the early stages of cancer development, and specific genes appear to be methylated at different tumor stages [69]. Due to the specific methylation characteristics of ctDNA, the limited abundance of ctDNA can be overcome in some measure. Recently, researchers have used Illumina to perform methylation analysis of cfDNA in urine and blood samples from PCa patients, capturing up to 39.40% and 64.14% of tumor-specific methylation changes, respectively [70]. Their study demonstrated the feasibility and accuracy of monitoring tumor methylomes through liquid biopsy of urine or plasma cfDNA.

The identification of more tumor-specific methylation markers facilitated detecting PCa at an early stage through epigenetic markers. Hypermethylation of GSTP1 has been most extensively studied in PCa patients, for it has a very high specificity for PCa detection, which can be as high as more than 90%, but the sensitivity is less than 40%. When combined with more methylated sites such as PTGS2, RPRM, and TIG1, the diagnostic sensitivity can be improved compared with GSTP1 testing alone [71]. Wu et al. [72] also concluded through a meta-analysis that the combined specificity of GSTP1 promoter methylation measured in plasma, serum, and urine samples was 0.89 (95% CI, 0.80–0.95), which was better than that of PSA and could complement the current screening tools. Constâncio et al. [73] selected eight candidate genes (APC, FOXA1, GSTP1, HOXD3, RARβ2, RASSF1A, SEPT9, and SOX17) to develop a minimally invasive methylation-based analysis tool for early detection of lung, prostate, and colorectal cancers in men. SEPT9 and SOX17 are methylated in all three cancers; FOXA1, RARβ2, and RASSF1A are methylated in lung and prostate cancers; GSTP1 SOX17 methylation can differentiate lung and prostate cancers with a specificity of 93%. Taken together, their study suggests that plasma cfDNA methylation can be applied in the early detection of lung and prostate cancers, thereby improving patient compliance and reducing healthcare costs. A study in 2021 analyzed three specific methylation sites (RNF219, KIAA1539, and GSTP1) in plasma cfDNA from PCa patients, healthy donors, and patients with BPH using the MiSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Results showed that RNF219 methylation levels did not exceed 0.02% in BPH patients, and methylation of different cytosines in GSTP1 can be used to identify the three tested groups [74]. Furthermore, researchers have examined androgen receptor (AR) p.H875Y mutations, cfDNA methylation, and circulating miRNA, to develop analytical models through machine learning to distinguish patients with various cancers from healthy people, including PCa [75].

cfDNA shedding into body fluids is shredded from chromatin or extrachromosomal mitochondrial DNA by nucleases, and nucleases within the cell or in the circulation cut DNA in a preferentially nonrandom way. cfDNA fragmentation carries information including fragment sizes, end motifs, preferred ends, nucleosomal footprint topologies, and single-stranded jagged ends, thus making cfDNA fragmentation profile not only useful in ctDNA extraction but also in distinguishing cancer patients from the healthy population [[76], [77], [78], [79], [80]]. It is well known that the size range of cfDNA fragments is wide, while tumor-derived cfDNA tends to have smaller sizes. Therefore, selectively enriching small fragments of DNA helps to identify more cfDNA with tumor characteristics [26,81,82]. Promising data have been reported in primary hepatocellular carcinoma [81,83], colorectal cancer [77], renal cancer [80], glioma cancer [26], and pancreatic cancer [26].

Some researchers found that the integrity of cfDNA, defined as the ratio of longer fragments to total cfDNA, in PCa patients is higher than that in healthy people, and it increases with disease severity and higher stage [84]. However, the correlation is just the opposite in breast cancer [84]. Chen et al. [85] discovered that the average size of cfDNA fragment (173 bp) was statistically significantly shorter than that observed in controls (p=0.0003), indicating that the average cfDNA fragment size was associated with an elevated risk of localized PCa. As shorter cfDNA fragments tend to be originated from apoptosis and longer fragments are produced by necrosis or NETosis [79], it suggests that mechanically the cfDNA size result from different biological processes reflects the state of the origin of cells.

Sequence alterations at the ends of cfDNA fragments are another key point as the preferred ends of cfDNA usually represent the open chromatin within the genome and the genome accessible sites [57]. Jiang et al. [86] identified a hepatocellular carcinoma-specific fragment end signature and validated its tumor association. Furthermore, cfDNA is wrapped around nucleosomes and transcription factors binding site accessibility can also be inferred from nucleosome positioning or occupancy [57]. Researchers have used nucleosomal imprinting of cfDNA to infer transcription factor profiles to PCa subtypes and even detect early-stage colorectal cancer [87]. In conclusion, since the fragment omics of cfDNA is closely related to the subtype or progression stage of tumors, it can be predicted that the fragment analysis of cfDNA will play a key role in the early diagnosis of PCa, and it deserves more in-depth research and exploration.

Mutant genetic testing of cfDNA is a fundamental approach to analyzing cancer genomes, which can also overcome the low abundance of cfDNA in body fluids. Zhang et al. [88] designed a ctDNA-based study of over 10 000 pan-cancer Chinese patients. To eliminate the interference of clonal hematopoiesis-related variants, they also sequenced white blood cell DNA in parallel and compared it with cfDNA. Results showed that 14% of cfDNA samples contained clonal hematopoietic variants, the detectability of which increased with age. After elimination of clonal hematopoietic variants, ctDNA was detected in 73.5% of all enrolled plasma samples, with small cell lung cancer (91.1%) and PCa (87.9%) showing the highest detectability. The specific mutational landscape of pan-cancer ctDNA was further investigated. Half of the plasma samples (50.5%) carried TP53 mutations, and PCa plasma showed a frequency of AR mutation. These results confirm the feasibility of ctDNA mutational analysis in diagnosing PCa.

However, the study by Zhang et al. [88] also suggests that confounding factors cannot be eliminated. Technical artifacts introduced by weak tumor fraction (TF) signals, CHIP, library preparation, and sequencing can easily affect early the sensitivity and specificity of applying ctDNA mutation in PCa early detection. Besides, the cost of deep sequencing of the whole genome is relatively too high for clinical application [89]. Therefore, to improve the performance of mutation detection, Cario et al. [90] used machine learning to design an optimized targeted sequencing panel. They computationally selected subjects into the training set and built a machine learning model based on a database of known tumors. Notably, targeted gene sequencing focused on gene regions of smaller length (<350 bp). In addition, they used unique molecular identifiers to suppress technical artifacts. Ultimately, the panel was shown to have the ability to detect tumor variants from cfDNA of PCa patients, promising to further improve the sensitivity of early detection of PCa. Chen et al. [91] performed low-pass whole-genome sequencing of cfDNA from different tumor regions using a machine learning-guided 2.5 Mb targeting panel and identified mutants in FOXA1, PTEN, MED12, and ATM that will help detect localized PCa. For early-stage PCa patients with a low tumor burden, cfDNA mutation monitoring is hindered by the limited ctDNA concentration; therefore, machine learning is often needed to optimize the detection performance by increasing the breadth of sequencing.

Besides blood cfDNA, urine cfDNA has also been implicated in the application of PCa diagnosis and treatment prognosis prediction [[92], [93], [94]], including urine cfDNA integrity [95,96], CNVs [97], and DNA methylation markers [93,98]. Although a lot of factors could affect the optimization of analytical efficacy of cfDNA in the urine, a few groups compared the cfDNA profiles from urine and blood. Chen et al. [99] analyzed the number of mutations and the frequency of mutation alleles was higher in PCa than in BPH, including TP53, AR, SPOP, MYC, and ATM. More importantly, the authors detected more mutations in urine than in blood, which indicated that urine cfDNA could be a surrogate for blood cfDNA analysis. However, it still needs to be verified in a large cohort. By combining multiple analytes, the liquid biopsy method including cfDNA is expected to improve the sensitivity and specificity of PCa early detection.

### Abundance analysis of cfDNA

Whether the abundance of cfDNA or ctDNA could be used in the early diagnosis of PCa remains controversial, while higher cfDNA levels or a higher proportion of ctDNA in liquid biopsy usually suggest a higher risk of PCa. The low abundance of cfDNA in early-stage cancers may limit its use in early screening and detection [57]. Hennigan et al. [58] applied ultra-low-pass whole-genome sequencing to profile cfDNA from patients diagnosed with localized PCa and patients with metastatic PCa. However, in this study, ctDNA was not detected in plasma from patients with locally advanced PCa before surgery or before biochemical recurrence, while ctDNA in patients with metastatic PCa can be detected by ultra-low-pass whole-genome sequencing. On the other hand, although high levels of cfDNA are less sensitive and cannot be directly used for definitive diagnosis, many studies showed that PCa patients have significantly higher levels of cfDNA than healthy controls [[59], [60], [61]]. In another study, patients with PCa had three times as much cfDNA in their plasma as those with BPH [62].

### cfDNA detection based on epigenetic changes

Great efforts have been made to use the cfDNA methylation marker to identify the tissue of origin in cancer and predict cancer risks [63,64]. Studies of circulating cell-free genome profiling for early detection of multiple cancers, including PCa, are being conducted in large-scale clinical trials [53]. In previous studies, it has been indicated that the methylation signature obtained by WGBS is superior to that of CNVs assessed by targeted sequencing in detecting cancer origins [65]. Moreover, the methylation signature can detect cancer with up to 99.3% specificity, and 93% of cancer cases can be correctly classified across different cancer stages [53]. In 2020, researchers reported the initial results of the development of PanSeer, a novel platform for analyzing cancer-specific methylation signatures [64]. In addition, through a large-scale retrospective study, PanSeer was shown to detect multiple cancer types (stomach, esophagus, colorectal, lung, or liver cancer) 4 years earlier before conventional diagnosis methods. Based on the research basis, the investigators will further evaluate the cancer-specific DNA methylation signatures to predict cancer and apply that to a large screening population in clinical trials [66].

DNA methylation is an epigenetic alteration known to be highly associated with tumors [67]. Numerous studies have confirmed that aberrant DNA methylation, including genome-wide hypomethylation that leads to genome instability and activation of silent oncogenes, and aberrant hypermethylation of sequence-specific CpG islands that activate tumor suppressor genes, are major contributors to tumor transformation [68]. Aberrant DNA methylation is generally thought to occur in the early stages of cancer development, and specific genes appear to be methylated at different tumor stages [69]. Due to the specific methylation characteristics of ctDNA, the limited abundance of ctDNA can be overcome in some measure. Recently, researchers have used Illumina to perform methylation analysis of cfDNA in urine and blood samples from PCa patients, capturing up to 39.40% and 64.14% of tumor-specific methylation changes, respectively [70]. Their study demonstrated the feasibility and accuracy of monitoring tumor methylomes through liquid biopsy of urine or plasma cfDNA.

The identification of more tumor-specific methylation markers facilitated detecting PCa at an early stage through epigenetic markers. Hypermethylation of GSTP1 has been most extensively studied in PCa patients, for it has a very high specificity for PCa detection, which can be as high as more than 90%, but the sensitivity is less than 40%. When combined with more methylated sites such as PTGS2, RPRM, and TIG1, the diagnostic sensitivity can be improved compared with GSTP1 testing alone [71]. Wu et al. [72] also concluded through a meta-analysis that the combined specificity of GSTP1 promoter methylation measured in plasma, serum, and urine samples was 0.89 (95% CI, 0.80–0.95), which was better than that of PSA and could complement the current screening tools. Constâncio et al. [73] selected eight candidate genes (APC, FOXA1, GSTP1, HOXD3, RARβ2, RASSF1A, SEPT9, and SOX17) to develop a minimally invasive methylation-based analysis tool for early detection of lung, prostate, and colorectal cancers in men. SEPT9 and SOX17 are methylated in all three cancers; FOXA1, RARβ2, and RASSF1A are methylated in lung and prostate cancers; GSTP1 SOX17 methylation can differentiate lung and prostate cancers with a specificity of 93%. Taken together, their study suggests that plasma cfDNA methylation can be applied in the early detection of lung and prostate cancers, thereby improving patient compliance and reducing healthcare costs. A study in 2021 analyzed three specific methylation sites (RNF219, KIAA1539, and GSTP1) in plasma cfDNA from PCa patients, healthy donors, and patients with BPH using the MiSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Results showed that RNF219 methylation levels did not exceed 0.02% in BPH patients, and methylation of different cytosines in GSTP1 can be used to identify the three tested groups [74]. Furthermore, researchers have examined androgen receptor (AR) p.H875Y mutations, cfDNA methylation, and circulating miRNA, to develop analytical models through machine learning to distinguish patients with various cancers from healthy people, including PCa [75].

### Fragmentomics of cfDNA

cfDNA shedding into body fluids is shredded from chromatin or extrachromosomal mitochondrial DNA by nucleases, and nucleases within the cell or in the circulation cut DNA in a preferentially nonrandom way. cfDNA fragmentation carries information including fragment sizes, end motifs, preferred ends, nucleosomal footprint topologies, and single-stranded jagged ends, thus making cfDNA fragmentation profile not only useful in ctDNA extraction but also in distinguishing cancer patients from the healthy population [[76], [77], [78], [79], [80]]. It is well known that the size range of cfDNA fragments is wide, while tumor-derived cfDNA tends to have smaller sizes. Therefore, selectively enriching small fragments of DNA helps to identify more cfDNA with tumor characteristics [26,81,82]. Promising data have been reported in primary hepatocellular carcinoma [81,83], colorectal cancer [77], renal cancer [80], glioma cancer [26], and pancreatic cancer [26].

Some researchers found that the integrity of cfDNA, defined as the ratio of longer fragments to total cfDNA, in PCa patients is higher than that in healthy people, and it increases with disease severity and higher stage [84]. However, the correlation is just the opposite in breast cancer [84]. Chen et al. [85] discovered that the average size of cfDNA fragment (173 bp) was statistically significantly shorter than that observed in controls (p=0.0003), indicating that the average cfDNA fragment size was associated with an elevated risk of localized PCa. As shorter cfDNA fragments tend to be originated from apoptosis and longer fragments are produced by necrosis or NETosis [79], it suggests that mechanically the cfDNA size result from different biological processes reflects the state of the origin of cells.

Sequence alterations at the ends of cfDNA fragments are another key point as the preferred ends of cfDNA usually represent the open chromatin within the genome and the genome accessible sites [57]. Jiang et al. [86] identified a hepatocellular carcinoma-specific fragment end signature and validated its tumor association. Furthermore, cfDNA is wrapped around nucleosomes and transcription factors binding site accessibility can also be inferred from nucleosome positioning or occupancy [57]. Researchers have used nucleosomal imprinting of cfDNA to infer transcription factor profiles to PCa subtypes and even detect early-stage colorectal cancer [87]. In conclusion, since the fragment omics of cfDNA is closely related to the subtype or progression stage of tumors, it can be predicted that the fragment analysis of cfDNA will play a key role in the early diagnosis of PCa, and it deserves more in-depth research and exploration.

### Mutation detection in cfDNA

Mutant genetic testing of cfDNA is a fundamental approach to analyzing cancer genomes, which can also overcome the low abundance of cfDNA in body fluids. Zhang et al. [88] designed a ctDNA-based study of over 10 000 pan-cancer Chinese patients. To eliminate the interference of clonal hematopoiesis-related variants, they also sequenced white blood cell DNA in parallel and compared it with cfDNA. Results showed that 14% of cfDNA samples contained clonal hematopoietic variants, the detectability of which increased with age. After elimination of clonal hematopoietic variants, ctDNA was detected in 73.5% of all enrolled plasma samples, with small cell lung cancer (91.1%) and PCa (87.9%) showing the highest detectability. The specific mutational landscape of pan-cancer ctDNA was further investigated. Half of the plasma samples (50.5%) carried TP53 mutations, and PCa plasma showed a frequency of AR mutation. These results confirm the feasibility of ctDNA mutational analysis in diagnosing PCa.

However, the study by Zhang et al. [88] also suggests that confounding factors cannot be eliminated. Technical artifacts introduced by weak tumor fraction (TF) signals, CHIP, library preparation, and sequencing can easily affect early the sensitivity and specificity of applying ctDNA mutation in PCa early detection. Besides, the cost of deep sequencing of the whole genome is relatively too high for clinical application [89]. Therefore, to improve the performance of mutation detection, Cario et al. [90] used machine learning to design an optimized targeted sequencing panel. They computationally selected subjects into the training set and built a machine learning model based on a database of known tumors. Notably, targeted gene sequencing focused on gene regions of smaller length (<350 bp). In addition, they used unique molecular identifiers to suppress technical artifacts. Ultimately, the panel was shown to have the ability to detect tumor variants from cfDNA of PCa patients, promising to further improve the sensitivity of early detection of PCa. Chen et al. [91] performed low-pass whole-genome sequencing of cfDNA from different tumor regions using a machine learning-guided 2.5 Mb targeting panel and identified mutants in FOXA1, PTEN, MED12, and ATM that will help detect localized PCa. For early-stage PCa patients with a low tumor burden, cfDNA mutation monitoring is hindered by the limited ctDNA concentration; therefore, machine learning is often needed to optimize the detection performance by increasing the breadth of sequencing.

Besides blood cfDNA, urine cfDNA has also been implicated in the application of PCa diagnosis and treatment prognosis prediction [[92], [93], [94]], including urine cfDNA integrity [95,96], CNVs [97], and DNA methylation markers [93,98]. Although a lot of factors could affect the optimization of analytical efficacy of cfDNA in the urine, a few groups compared the cfDNA profiles from urine and blood. Chen et al. [99] analyzed the number of mutations and the frequency of mutation alleles was higher in PCa than in BPH, including TP53, AR, SPOP, MYC, and ATM. More importantly, the authors detected more mutations in urine than in blood, which indicated that urine cfDNA could be a surrogate for blood cfDNA analysis. However, it still needs to be verified in a large cohort. By combining multiple analytes, the liquid biopsy method including cfDNA is expected to improve the sensitivity and specificity of PCa early detection.

### cfDNA in PCa risk stratification and monitoring

cfDNA is reflective of the molecular features of PCa and metastasis; it is increasingly being used to guide clinical treatment decisions for patients in their advanced stages of PCa. At the early stage of PCa or when PSA is at low level, the TF of ctDNA is often undetectable. In a real-world study of PCa, PSA can be a reasonable proxy to anticipate TF levels. At PSA levels of less than 5 ng/mL, 43% of patients had less than 1% of TF of cfDNA, which often leads to unevaluable results. However, at PSA levels of over 5 ng/mL, 78% and 46% of patients had a TF of at least 1% and more than 10%, respectively. This will significantly improve the sensitivity of detection of targetable alterations [100].

High levels of cfDNA are potential biomarkers of poor prognosis. Kubota et al. [101] found that patients with CRPC had significantly higher median cfDNA levels (387 pg/μL) and androgen amplification (1.07 copies) than healthy controls, and higher cfDNA levels (>600 pg/μL) and androgen amplification (>1.26 copies) were significantly associated with shorter overall survival (OS). A study of metastatic CRPC (mCRPC) patients treated with AR pathway inhibitors showed that elevated total cfDNA concentrations at baseline (hazard ratio [HR] 5.5, p<0.001) and at week 4 (HR 7.5, p<0.001) were significantly negative for OS prognostic factors [102]. Another group also found that mCRPC patients yielded more cfDNA (17.97 ng/mL) than untreated metastatic hormone-sensitive PCa patients (4.32 ng/mL) [103]. A meta-analysis of 13 articles showed that the cfDNA concentration was significantly correlated with progression-free survival (log HR = 0.84) and even OS (log HR = 0.60) of PCa [104]. ctDNA levels correlate with the presence of bone metastases and elevated PSA level in mCRPC patients [105]. Attard et al. [106] applied a computational method to detect ctDNA based on allele frequencies of polymorphisms and mutations and found that the ctDNA positive rate was significantly correlated with tumor burden. ctDNA positivity was 7.5% in mCRPC, 23.7% in metastatic castration-sensitive PCa, and 66% in heavily pre-treated mCRPC. And ctDNA positive patients have significantly shorter OS in mCRPC and metastatic castration-sensitive PCa.

ctDNA fraction is also predictive of PCa progressiveness. The ctDNA fraction is estimated from the allele fraction of autosomal somatic mutations and is a quantitative tool that reflects tumor burden. A prospective cohort study found that metastatic hormone-sensitive PCa patients with high ctDNA fraction had worse OS and were associated with shorter time to androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) failure [103]. Circulating TF calculated based on genomic single nucleotide polymorphism aneuploidy can assess prognosis. In real-world univariate analysis, ctDNA TF more than 10% was highly associated with OS in mCRPC patients (HR 3.3, 95% CI: 2.04–5.34, p<0.001) [107].

As ctDNA analysis can reflect nearly all driver gene alterations in matched PCa metastases, this concordance makes ctDNA a reliable surrogate of “solid” tissue biopsy [108]. Sonpavde et al. [109] performed cfDNA genomic analysis using Guardant 360 (Guardant Health, Inc. Palo Alto, CA, USA) in patients with mCRPC, and found that 94% of patients had cfDNA alterations, among which common somatic mutations included TP53, AR, and APC; the most common genes with increased copy number are AR, MYC, BRAF, etc. They also found that higher numbers of cfDNA mutations, as well as AR and MYC amplification, were significantly associated with worse OS. Shaya et al. [110] found that mCRPC patients with more than one alteration on ctDNA analysis have inferior OS (26.1 months vs. 8.8 months, p<0.001), suggesting that the presence and actionable alterations identified by NGS can predict OS in mCRPC. In addition, cfDNA analysis can provide additional clues to patient prognosis by identifying heterogeneous genomic features of metastatic PCa. An interesting study that performed cfDNA sequencing of PCa from various metastatic sites showed a higher rate of PTEN alterations in visceral metastatic PCa compared to bone-only metastatic PCa (9.09% vs. 2.08%, p=0.105), and the alteration frequency of DNA repair genes and AR could further distinguish different visceral metastatic sites [111]. Copy number gain or loss is frequent in advanced PCa, but detection of CNVs in ctDNA remains challenging especially when ctDNA fraction is low. A novel NGS-based cfDNA assay optimized for CNV readily detects PTEN-PI3K-AKT pathway alterations which were comparable with tissue-based researches and found that genomic aberrations in the PTEN-PI3K-AKT pathway in mCRPC patients predict poorer outcomes in a cohort study [112].

Prediction value of DNA methylation markers in tissue has already been well verified; recently the potential of ctDNA methylation-based biomarkers for predicting PCa prognosis was also confirmed, with methylations of USP44 [113], APC [114], GSTP1 [114], EDNRB [115], MDR1 [115], ZNF660 [116], and RARβ2 [117] have been reported to be more common in late-stage or recurrent patients compared to early-stage PCa patients. Methylation at these sites is associated with a worse prognosis. Among them, GSTP1 methylation was most intensively studied. Preoperative serum GSTP1 methylation can predict the biochemical recurrence after prostatectomy [118]. Undetection of serum-free methylated GSTP1 before docetaxel in mCRPC patients was significantly associated with longer OS (HR: 0.4, p<0.00001) [119]. Integrated whole-genome approaches incorporating WGBS, and whole-genome and transcriptome sequencing of mCRPC metastases unveil the important regulatory role of methylation that affects key driver genes like AR, KLK3, NKX3-1, ERG, FOXA1, and HOXB13 [120]. The complicated regulation mechanism between somatic mutation and aberrant methylation warrants further investigation.

Radical prostatectomy by any approach aims to eradicate cancer, but postoperative recurrence or metastasis significantly impacts patient's long-term survival. Although it has been found that the median cfDNA concentration in localized PCa was significantly lower than that in mCRPC patients [85], the cfDNA level will be almost doubled immediately after prostatectomy, making an important cfDNA testing time window to overcome the low abundance of cfDNA in localized PCa [121]. However, most of the studies now tend to use preoperative samples for predicting the risk of recurrence and metastasis.

Optimal management of PCa relies on precise risk estimation. Identifying aggressive PCa after radical prostatectomy which needs early intervention requires sensitive biomarkers. Initial efforts were mainly focused on applying tissue-based biomarkers including pathological results, DNA mutations, DNA methylations, aberrant RNA, or protein expression [8,[122], [123], [124], [125], [126]].

A previous study has already shown that increased cfDNA concentration was associated with lymph node and distant metastases [127]. In a meta-analysis, Liu et al. [104] proposed that high cfDNA correlated with early biochemical recurrence and OS. Lau et al. [128] selected cfDNA TP53 mutations in a retrospective cohort, and confirmed in a prospective cohort that preoperatively detected mutations in TP53 were associated with shortened metastasis-free survival (6.2 years vs. 9.5 years; HR 2.4, 95% CI 1.2–4.8; p=0.014). ctDNA methylation also shows a promising role in identifying metastatic PCa. ctDNA methylations of DOCK2, HAPLN3, and FBXO30 were detected in 61.5% (40/65) of de novo metastatic PCa patients, while they were not detected in healthy controls, BPH patients, or localized PCa patients [50].

These studies suggest that preoperative tumor-specific alterations in cfDNA are associated with postoperative recurrence or metastatic progression, and interestingly if positive cfDNA alterations can still be detected postoperatively, it could still help to dynamically monitor postoperative conditions and guide treatment.

As a complement to invasive cancer or metastasis tissue biopsy, cfDNA provides a landscape profiling of genomic alteration in advanced PCa, especially when successful tissue biopsy is challenging in late-stage patients. Currently, the largest ctDNA analysis was conducted in 3334 mCRPC patients and showed that 94% of patients had detectable ctDNA (median ctDNA fraction: 7.5%) [129]. Among patients who had BRCA1/2 mutation detected in a tissue biopsy, 93% of them were also detected in ctDNA, indicating a high concordance. Most importantly, they also detected BRCA1/2 mutations that only existed in ctDNA, suggesting that the ctDNA test can overcome the tumor heterogeneity that could not be fully shown in tissue biopsy. Zhao et al. [130] performed targeted sequencing of cfDNA in PCa patients with or without intraductal carcinoma of the prostate (IDC-P) and compared the genomic characteristics of the two groups of patients. Results showed that pathogenic DNA repair alterations were more frequently detected in patients with IDC-P (11.8% [19/161] vs. 2.4% [2/84], p=0.024), among IDC-P carriers; they specifically found defects in BRCA (8.7% [14/161] vs. 0%) and CDK12 (6.8% [11/161] vs. 1.2% [1/84]), and AR pathway-related nuclear receptor corepressor 2 mutations were enriched (21.1% [34/161] vs. 6.0% [5/84], p=0.004). Their study provides a good explanation of the aggressive molecular subtype of IDC-P based on genomic evidence, and can provide potential therapeutic strategies for this patient population.

Since PCa is a genetically heterogeneous disease with different molecular subtypes, patients with advanced PCa often respond very differently to different treatment strategies. Tumor-associated molecular alterations within mCRPC cfDNA can be informative for drug therapy, and many studies have evaluated the efficacy of cfDNA for monitoring treatment response or resistance mechanism (Fig. 3).Figure 3Clinical applications of cfDNA in the management of advanced or recurrent or progressed prostate cancer. Molecular alterations derived from urine or blood cfDNA have high concordance with tissue biopsy and can overcome tumor heterogeneity limited by multi-tumor or metastasis foci. Specific genetic variations defined different molecular subtypes. For example, prostate cancer with loss of functions alterations in DNA damage repair pathways unveiled by cfDNA analysis often suggests more aggressive clinical and pathological characteristics. These patients were more suitable to be treated with PARP inhibitors while they were more likely to be resistant to anti-androgen therapy. cfDNA, circulating cell-free DNA; ICI, immune checkpoint inhibitor; OS, overall survival; AR, androgen receptor; AR V7(+), androgen receptor splice variant 7 (positive); CDK12, cyclin dependent kinase 12; PARP, poly adenosine diphosphate ribose polymerase; BRCA2, breast cancer susceptibility genes 2; ATM, ataxia telangiectasia-mutated gene. This figure was created with BioRender.com (BioRender, Toronto, Canada).Figure 3

Clinical applications of cfDNA in the management of advanced or recurrent or progressed prostate cancer. Molecular alterations derived from urine or blood cfDNA have high concordance with tissue biopsy and can overcome tumor heterogeneity limited by multi-tumor or metastasis foci. Specific genetic variations defined different molecular subtypes. For example, prostate cancer with loss of functions alterations in DNA damage repair pathways unveiled by cfDNA analysis often suggests more aggressive clinical and pathological characteristics. These patients were more suitable to be treated with PARP inhibitors while they were more likely to be resistant to anti-androgen therapy. cfDNA, circulating cell-free DNA; ICI, immune checkpoint inhibitor; OS, overall survival; AR, androgen receptor; AR V7(+), androgen receptor splice variant 7 (positive); CDK12, cyclin dependent kinase 12; PARP, poly adenosine diphosphate ribose polymerase; BRCA2, breast cancer susceptibility genes 2; ATM, ataxia telangiectasia-mutated gene. This figure was created with BioRender.com (BioRender, Toronto, Canada).

AR is a master regulator of PCa. Targeting the androgen pathway is still the cornerstone for advanced PCa. Several novel androgen pathway inhibitors have been adopted in clinical practice and significantly improved survival for metastasis or relapsed PCa. AR gain, mutations, and genomic structural rearrangements have been reported to be associated with castration resistance [131]. The limited number of studies available suggest that it is possible to detect AR genomic events and AR splice variants in cfDNA [[132], [133], [134], [135], [136]], and AR is the second most frequently altered (42%) gene in mCRPC ctDNA [129], thus making ctDNA of great value in predicting the effectiveness of anti-androgen therapies. In mCRPC patients undergoing enzalutamide treatment, Wyatt et al. [134] detected AR mutations and/or CNVs in 48% of patients at baseline and 60% of patients at progression. Further univariable analysis between baseline characteristics and progression-free survival showed that detection of AR amplification (HR: 2.72, p=0.008), heavily mutated AR (more than two mutations) (HR: 3.94, p=0.007) were statistically associated with worse progression-free survival, outperforming Gleason score (HR: 1.26, p=0.45) and lymph node metastases status (HR: 1.59, p=0.12). It has also been demonstrated that AR gain cfDNA correlated with AR splice variant 7 (AR-V7) in exosomes and both of them can predict resistance to AR signaling inhibitors [137]. cfDNA analysis could provide information to select patients more likely to benefit from antiandrogen treatment and those who should consider alternative therapies [138].

About 15%–20% of advanced treatment-resistant PCa will histologically progress to castration-resistant neuroendocrine prostate cancer (CRPC-NE) with a worse prognosis, which is often accompanied by downregulation of AR signaling and expression of classical neuroendocrine markers such as chromogranin, synaptophysin. Methylation was significantly different between CRPC patients and CRPC-NE patients, and the combined genomic (TP53, RB1, CYLD, and AR) and epigenetic genomic (hypomethylation or hypermethylation at 20 differential sites) alterations generated targeted sets that were able to identify CRPC-NE patients [49]. In 2022, Berchuck et al. [51] generated a risk prediction model based on methylation immunoprecipitation and high-throughput sequencing analysis of tissue and plasma cfDNA and could distinguish castration-resistant prostate adenocarcinoma from CRPC-NE patients with an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of up to 1.0 in a multi-institutional validation cohort. Multidimensional cfDNA analysis for CRPC-NE will provide a good target for the diagnosis and treatment of PCa drug-resistant phenotypes.

PCa with loss-of-function alterations in DNA damage repair pathways (including BRCA1/2, ATM, and several others) is often associated with more aggressive characteristics and resistance to ADT. Fan et al. [139] found that DNA damage repair pathway genes were altered more frequently in mCRPC patients than in metastatic hormone-sensitive PCa patients (66.7% vs. 41.5%, p=0.015). Annala et al. [140] performed whole-exome and deep-targeted 72-gene sequencing of ctDNA in 202 treatment-naïve mCRPC patients before abiraterone or enzalutamide, and the results showed that in patients with BRCA2/ATM truncating mutation, 69.2% of patients progressed with 12 weeks with a median of time to progression of 1.8 months.

Defects in DNA damage repair pathways also confer sensitivity to PARPi [141]. In phase II clinical trial, Mateo et al. [142] evaluated objective responses to treatment with the PARPi olaparib. NGS analysis of tumor tissue DNA was performed and treatment-sensitive related alterations were identified in BRCA2, ATM, BRCA1, PALB2, CHEK2, FANCA, and HDAC2. These changes above are linked to DNA repair defects. The same group of researchers further investigated the clinical utility of cfDNA analysis. After 4 weeks of treatment with olaparib in mCRPC patients, the cfDNA concentration of treatment responders decreased by 51.4%, which was significantly higher than that of non-responders; and the frequency of cfDNA gene mutation continued to decrease with treatment time. More importantly, they identified several subclonal aberrations that revert germline and somatic DNA repair mutations (BRCA2 and PALB2) in the frame when the disease progressed following response to olaparib. These therapeutically driven aberrations could be the mechanisms of resistance. In a real-world mCRPC case that firstly showed a response to olaparib and then progressed, Yuan et al. [143] also identified two reverse missense mutations in BRCA2 from ctDNA. These two mutations shared the same loci with the germline deleterious variant c.751C>T and restored the open reading frame of BRCA2 and could explain the progressing mechanism during olaparib treatment.

Although tissue-based NSG testing on homologous recombination repair alterations is previously the gold standard, the selection of biopsy sites and preservation of samples could potentially impact the results. The existing multi-clonal foci may also affect the results. The tumor genomic testing for more than 4000 mCRPC tissue samples in the phase III trial PROfound showed that NGS results were obtained more frequently in newly gained (63.9% vs. 56.9%) and metastatic sites (63.9% vs. 56.2%) than archival or primary samples, respectively [144]. In contrast, ctDNA results were successfully reported in 76.8% of patients, and ctDNA showed concordance with tissue-based analysis of HRR mutation status [145]. For patients with ctDNA BRCA or ATM alterations, radiographic progression-free survival was significantly longer among patients who received olaparib, and these improvement results were consistent with tumor tissue testing results [141,145,146]. Another group also showed that the concordance in DNA damage repair gene mutations in primary prostate tissue matched with metastatic tissue and ctDNA findings were 84% [147], suggesting that ctDNA biomarker alone could guide mCRPC patient management [108]. In conclusion, these studies strongly demonstrated that cfDNA analysis is a powerful tool to guide the treatment selection of advanced PCa and monitor treatment response [148].

Immune checkpoint inhibition can reactivate T cells and eliminate cancer cells more efficiently. A growing number of studies have shown that inhibition of PD-1 promotes an effective immune response against cancer cells. It was recently demonstrated that patients with gastric cancer who responded better to immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) therapy had a more than 25% decrease in the maximum somatic VAF in cfDNA [149].

ICIs are still been evaluated in advanced PCa, although the response rate is inferior to other cancer types [150]. Identifying biomarkers that help to predict and monitor ICI monotherapy or combined therapy response is worth exploring [151]. Barata et al. [152] used a commercially available cfDNA NGS assay Guardant 360 and identified 14 microsatellite instability-high metastatic PCa patients. Among them, nine mCRPC patients were treated with pembrolizumab after 0 to 4 prior lines of therapy for CRPC. After a median of 4 weeks of pembrolizumab, four patients achieved 50% PSA decline with three patients having more than 99% PSA decline. The study by Kwan et al. [153] highlighted the potential value of ctDNA in monitoring mCRPC patients treated with avelumab and stereotactic ablative body radiotherapy. Their study suggests that the presence of baseline AR alterations, MYC gain, and high baseline ctDNA scores may be associated with poorer outcomes. More importantly, their study showed an mCRPC patient who had a rise of PSA at 6 weeks and a very nice late PSA response (12 weeks) to avelumab can have a decline in ctDNA as early as 6 weeks, suggesting that ctDNA monitoring can overcome the issue of disease flare or pseudo-progression when first commencing ICI drugs, thus providing accurate evaluation of drug response.

Recently a Canadian group showed that CDK12 (4.4%), ATM (3.0%), and BRCA2 (7.3%) were the most disrupted DNA-damage response gene in mCRPC ctDNA [154]. CDK12 mutated PCa represents a distinct molecular cancer subtype and an aggressive phenotype with high risks of metastasis and short OS [155], while preliminary data showed that these patients may potentially benefit from ICI [156,157]. It's also worth noting that the frequency of CDK12 alteration in Chinese mCRPC patients (15.4%) was significantly higher than that in the Western cohort and all the CDK12 mutations identified in tissue samples were found consistent in ctDNA [139,158]. It implied that ctDNA can help to distinguish CDK12 mutated PCa and Chinese patients may benefit more from ICI treatment. However, more research on cfDNA in the determination of ICI treatment response in PCa patients is still needed.

Tumor heterogeneity may lead to primary or secondary treatment resistance, and the tumor may evolve under treatment pressure. Thus, it's of great importance to monitor treatment response and supervise tumor evolution in a real-time manner. Sumanasuriya et al. [159] conducted low-throughput whole-genome sequencing in mCRPC patients' cfDNA samples undergoing docetaxel or cabazitaxel treatment. These samples were collected at different time points including baseline and cycle 1, cycle 4, and end of the study. They not only just identified that the ctDNA fraction at baseline was significantly associated with OS, radiographic progression-free survival, and PSA-progression-free survival, but also found that the ctDNA fraction remained stable in non-responders during treatment (median 9.7% at baseline, 9.1% on treatment), while exhibited remarkable decrease in responders (median 8.7% at baseline, 0% on treatment). Other researchers have suggested that serum-free GSTP1 methylation levels are also associated with docetaxel treatment response [119]. cfDNA is a promising tool in assessing tumor burden during treatment and identifying potential progression mechanisms. Carson et al. [160] developed a highly multiplexed targeted sequencing DNA methylation-based ctDNA blood test and examined it in a series of longitudinal samples in patients undergoing ADT treatment. It showed that the ctDNA test can be used to assess tumor burden and indicate ADT resistance earlier than the conventional PSA test.

Besides monitoring treatment response, cfDNA also helps to recognize transformation to castration-resistant neuroendocrine PCa and uncover the mechanism of treatment resistance non-invasively [49,51]. Transdifferentiation from adenocarcinoma to neuroendocrine or small cell carcinoma which is a frequent mechanism of treatment resistance involved several key transcription factors [161]. DNA released into circulation is usually generated by nuclease digesting and the ctDNA sequence could be informative of the open chromatin region. A recent study showed transcription factors binding sites could be inferred by cfDNA fragmentation patterns assays and could further implicit the clinical management of PCa [87]. Through analyzing cfDNA fragmentation patterns during the transdifferentiation, Ulz et al. [87] identified the accessibility of AR, HOXB13, NKX3-1, GRHL2, and REST binding sites was reduced, and this was consistent with a previous report that REST downregulation was in up to 50% of castration-resistant neuroendocrine PCa [162]. It shows that cfDNA could help in monitoring the reprogramming process through a non-invasive method.

cfDNA also assists in tracking subclones with a selective advantage; this will provide us with a better understanding of tumor dynamics during treatment and progression. By applying whole-exome sequencing and WGBS of cfDNA, researchers identified CRPC-NE associated genetic (TP53, RB1, CYLD, and AR) and epigenetic (hypo- and hyper-methylation of 20 differential sites) markers [49]. More importantly, during the transdifferentiation from CRPC-adenocarcinoma to CRPC-NE, they identified a ctDNA profile similar to a CRPC-NE liver metastasis 3 months earlier before imaging was observed and biopsy-confirmed. This emphasized that dominant subclone ctDNA patterns were detectable earlier before developed clinical features [49].

cfDNA MRD detection has been developed in breast cancer [16,163], lung cancer [164], colon cancer [165], bladder cancer [166], etc. Recently, researchers have developed a test to track hundreds of patient-specific mutations to detect MRD from peripheral blood, which will help improve the treatment of patients with early-stage breast cancer [163]. There are still very few studies using cfDNA to predict MRD in PCa, possibly due to the low abundance of ctDNA after definitive treatment. In this regard, the future trend of PCa MRD identification might be compensated by an ultra-sensitive method including ctDNA methylation analysis.

### Prognostic assessment

cfDNA is reflective of the molecular features of PCa and metastasis; it is increasingly being used to guide clinical treatment decisions for patients in their advanced stages of PCa. At the early stage of PCa or when PSA is at low level, the TF of ctDNA is often undetectable. In a real-world study of PCa, PSA can be a reasonable proxy to anticipate TF levels. At PSA levels of less than 5 ng/mL, 43% of patients had less than 1% of TF of cfDNA, which often leads to unevaluable results. However, at PSA levels of over 5 ng/mL, 78% and 46% of patients had a TF of at least 1% and more than 10%, respectively. This will significantly improve the sensitivity of detection of targetable alterations [100].

High levels of cfDNA are potential biomarkers of poor prognosis. Kubota et al. [101] found that patients with CRPC had significantly higher median cfDNA levels (387 pg/μL) and androgen amplification (1.07 copies) than healthy controls, and higher cfDNA levels (>600 pg/μL) and androgen amplification (>1.26 copies) were significantly associated with shorter overall survival (OS). A study of metastatic CRPC (mCRPC) patients treated with AR pathway inhibitors showed that elevated total cfDNA concentrations at baseline (hazard ratio [HR] 5.5, p<0.001) and at week 4 (HR 7.5, p<0.001) were significantly negative for OS prognostic factors [102]. Another group also found that mCRPC patients yielded more cfDNA (17.97 ng/mL) than untreated metastatic hormone-sensitive PCa patients (4.32 ng/mL) [103]. A meta-analysis of 13 articles showed that the cfDNA concentration was significantly correlated with progression-free survival (log HR = 0.84) and even OS (log HR = 0.60) of PCa [104]. ctDNA levels correlate with the presence of bone metastases and elevated PSA level in mCRPC patients [105]. Attard et al. [106] applied a computational method to detect ctDNA based on allele frequencies of polymorphisms and mutations and found that the ctDNA positive rate was significantly correlated with tumor burden. ctDNA positivity was 7.5% in mCRPC, 23.7% in metastatic castration-sensitive PCa, and 66% in heavily pre-treated mCRPC. And ctDNA positive patients have significantly shorter OS in mCRPC and metastatic castration-sensitive PCa.

ctDNA fraction is also predictive of PCa progressiveness. The ctDNA fraction is estimated from the allele fraction of autosomal somatic mutations and is a quantitative tool that reflects tumor burden. A prospective cohort study found that metastatic hormone-sensitive PCa patients with high ctDNA fraction had worse OS and were associated with shorter time to androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) failure [103]. Circulating TF calculated based on genomic single nucleotide polymorphism aneuploidy can assess prognosis. In real-world univariate analysis, ctDNA TF more than 10% was highly associated with OS in mCRPC patients (HR 3.3, 95% CI: 2.04–5.34, p<0.001) [107].

As ctDNA analysis can reflect nearly all driver gene alterations in matched PCa metastases, this concordance makes ctDNA a reliable surrogate of “solid” tissue biopsy [108]. Sonpavde et al. [109] performed cfDNA genomic analysis using Guardant 360 (Guardant Health, Inc. Palo Alto, CA, USA) in patients with mCRPC, and found that 94% of patients had cfDNA alterations, among which common somatic mutations included TP53, AR, and APC; the most common genes with increased copy number are AR, MYC, BRAF, etc. They also found that higher numbers of cfDNA mutations, as well as AR and MYC amplification, were significantly associated with worse OS. Shaya et al. [110] found that mCRPC patients with more than one alteration on ctDNA analysis have inferior OS (26.1 months vs. 8.8 months, p<0.001), suggesting that the presence and actionable alterations identified by NGS can predict OS in mCRPC. In addition, cfDNA analysis can provide additional clues to patient prognosis by identifying heterogeneous genomic features of metastatic PCa. An interesting study that performed cfDNA sequencing of PCa from various metastatic sites showed a higher rate of PTEN alterations in visceral metastatic PCa compared to bone-only metastatic PCa (9.09% vs. 2.08%, p=0.105), and the alteration frequency of DNA repair genes and AR could further distinguish different visceral metastatic sites [111]. Copy number gain or loss is frequent in advanced PCa, but detection of CNVs in ctDNA remains challenging especially when ctDNA fraction is low. A novel NGS-based cfDNA assay optimized for CNV readily detects PTEN-PI3K-AKT pathway alterations which were comparable with tissue-based researches and found that genomic aberrations in the PTEN-PI3K-AKT pathway in mCRPC patients predict poorer outcomes in a cohort study [112].

Prediction value of DNA methylation markers in tissue has already been well verified; recently the potential of ctDNA methylation-based biomarkers for predicting PCa prognosis was also confirmed, with methylations of USP44 [113], APC [114], GSTP1 [114], EDNRB [115], MDR1 [115], ZNF660 [116], and RARβ2 [117] have been reported to be more common in late-stage or recurrent patients compared to early-stage PCa patients. Methylation at these sites is associated with a worse prognosis. Among them, GSTP1 methylation was most intensively studied. Preoperative serum GSTP1 methylation can predict the biochemical recurrence after prostatectomy [118]. Undetection of serum-free methylated GSTP1 before docetaxel in mCRPC patients was significantly associated with longer OS (HR: 0.4, p<0.00001) [119]. Integrated whole-genome approaches incorporating WGBS, and whole-genome and transcriptome sequencing of mCRPC metastases unveil the important regulatory role of methylation that affects key driver genes like AR, KLK3, NKX3-1, ERG, FOXA1, and HOXB13 [120]. The complicated regulation mechanism between somatic mutation and aberrant methylation warrants further investigation.

### Risk prediction of recurrence and metastasis after radical prostatectomy

Radical prostatectomy by any approach aims to eradicate cancer, but postoperative recurrence or metastasis significantly impacts patient's long-term survival. Although it has been found that the median cfDNA concentration in localized PCa was significantly lower than that in mCRPC patients [85], the cfDNA level will be almost doubled immediately after prostatectomy, making an important cfDNA testing time window to overcome the low abundance of cfDNA in localized PCa [121]. However, most of the studies now tend to use preoperative samples for predicting the risk of recurrence and metastasis.

Optimal management of PCa relies on precise risk estimation. Identifying aggressive PCa after radical prostatectomy which needs early intervention requires sensitive biomarkers. Initial efforts were mainly focused on applying tissue-based biomarkers including pathological results, DNA mutations, DNA methylations, aberrant RNA, or protein expression [8,[122], [123], [124], [125], [126]].

A previous study has already shown that increased cfDNA concentration was associated with lymph node and distant metastases [127]. In a meta-analysis, Liu et al. [104] proposed that high cfDNA correlated with early biochemical recurrence and OS. Lau et al. [128] selected cfDNA TP53 mutations in a retrospective cohort, and confirmed in a prospective cohort that preoperatively detected mutations in TP53 were associated with shortened metastasis-free survival (6.2 years vs. 9.5 years; HR 2.4, 95% CI 1.2–4.8; p=0.014). ctDNA methylation also shows a promising role in identifying metastatic PCa. ctDNA methylations of DOCK2, HAPLN3, and FBXO30 were detected in 61.5% (40/65) of de novo metastatic PCa patients, while they were not detected in healthy controls, BPH patients, or localized PCa patients [50].

These studies suggest that preoperative tumor-specific alterations in cfDNA are associated with postoperative recurrence or metastatic progression, and interestingly if positive cfDNA alterations can still be detected postoperatively, it could still help to dynamically monitor postoperative conditions and guide treatment.

### Monitoring of treatment response and drug resistance mechanism

As a complement to invasive cancer or metastasis tissue biopsy, cfDNA provides a landscape profiling of genomic alteration in advanced PCa, especially when successful tissue biopsy is challenging in late-stage patients. Currently, the largest ctDNA analysis was conducted in 3334 mCRPC patients and showed that 94% of patients had detectable ctDNA (median ctDNA fraction: 7.5%) [129]. Among patients who had BRCA1/2 mutation detected in a tissue biopsy, 93% of them were also detected in ctDNA, indicating a high concordance. Most importantly, they also detected BRCA1/2 mutations that only existed in ctDNA, suggesting that the ctDNA test can overcome the tumor heterogeneity that could not be fully shown in tissue biopsy. Zhao et al. [130] performed targeted sequencing of cfDNA in PCa patients with or without intraductal carcinoma of the prostate (IDC-P) and compared the genomic characteristics of the two groups of patients. Results showed that pathogenic DNA repair alterations were more frequently detected in patients with IDC-P (11.8% [19/161] vs. 2.4% [2/84], p=0.024), among IDC-P carriers; they specifically found defects in BRCA (8.7% [14/161] vs. 0%) and CDK12 (6.8% [11/161] vs. 1.2% [1/84]), and AR pathway-related nuclear receptor corepressor 2 mutations were enriched (21.1% [34/161] vs. 6.0% [5/84], p=0.004). Their study provides a good explanation of the aggressive molecular subtype of IDC-P based on genomic evidence, and can provide potential therapeutic strategies for this patient population.

Since PCa is a genetically heterogeneous disease with different molecular subtypes, patients with advanced PCa often respond very differently to different treatment strategies. Tumor-associated molecular alterations within mCRPC cfDNA can be informative for drug therapy, and many studies have evaluated the efficacy of cfDNA for monitoring treatment response or resistance mechanism (Fig. 3).Figure 3Clinical applications of cfDNA in the management of advanced or recurrent or progressed prostate cancer. Molecular alterations derived from urine or blood cfDNA have high concordance with tissue biopsy and can overcome tumor heterogeneity limited by multi-tumor or metastasis foci. Specific genetic variations defined different molecular subtypes. For example, prostate cancer with loss of functions alterations in DNA damage repair pathways unveiled by cfDNA analysis often suggests more aggressive clinical and pathological characteristics. These patients were more suitable to be treated with PARP inhibitors while they were more likely to be resistant to anti-androgen therapy. cfDNA, circulating cell-free DNA; ICI, immune checkpoint inhibitor; OS, overall survival; AR, androgen receptor; AR V7(+), androgen receptor splice variant 7 (positive); CDK12, cyclin dependent kinase 12; PARP, poly adenosine diphosphate ribose polymerase; BRCA2, breast cancer susceptibility genes 2; ATM, ataxia telangiectasia-mutated gene. This figure was created with BioRender.com (BioRender, Toronto, Canada).Figure 3

Clinical applications of cfDNA in the management of advanced or recurrent or progressed prostate cancer. Molecular alterations derived from urine or blood cfDNA have high concordance with tissue biopsy and can overcome tumor heterogeneity limited by multi-tumor or metastasis foci. Specific genetic variations defined different molecular subtypes. For example, prostate cancer with loss of functions alterations in DNA damage repair pathways unveiled by cfDNA analysis often suggests more aggressive clinical and pathological characteristics. These patients were more suitable to be treated with PARP inhibitors while they were more likely to be resistant to anti-androgen therapy. cfDNA, circulating cell-free DNA; ICI, immune checkpoint inhibitor; OS, overall survival; AR, androgen receptor; AR V7(+), androgen receptor splice variant 7 (positive); CDK12, cyclin dependent kinase 12; PARP, poly adenosine diphosphate ribose polymerase; BRCA2, breast cancer susceptibility genes 2; ATM, ataxia telangiectasia-mutated gene. This figure was created with BioRender.com (BioRender, Toronto, Canada).

AR is a master regulator of PCa. Targeting the androgen pathway is still the cornerstone for advanced PCa. Several novel androgen pathway inhibitors have been adopted in clinical practice and significantly improved survival for metastasis or relapsed PCa. AR gain, mutations, and genomic structural rearrangements have been reported to be associated with castration resistance [131]. The limited number of studies available suggest that it is possible to detect AR genomic events and AR splice variants in cfDNA [[132], [133], [134], [135], [136]], and AR is the second most frequently altered (42%) gene in mCRPC ctDNA [129], thus making ctDNA of great value in predicting the effectiveness of anti-androgen therapies. In mCRPC patients undergoing enzalutamide treatment, Wyatt et al. [134] detected AR mutations and/or CNVs in 48% of patients at baseline and 60% of patients at progression. Further univariable analysis between baseline characteristics and progression-free survival showed that detection of AR amplification (HR: 2.72, p=0.008), heavily mutated AR (more than two mutations) (HR: 3.94, p=0.007) were statistically associated with worse progression-free survival, outperforming Gleason score (HR: 1.26, p=0.45) and lymph node metastases status (HR: 1.59, p=0.12). It has also been demonstrated that AR gain cfDNA correlated with AR splice variant 7 (AR-V7) in exosomes and both of them can predict resistance to AR signaling inhibitors [137]. cfDNA analysis could provide information to select patients more likely to benefit from antiandrogen treatment and those who should consider alternative therapies [138].

About 15%–20% of advanced treatment-resistant PCa will histologically progress to castration-resistant neuroendocrine prostate cancer (CRPC-NE) with a worse prognosis, which is often accompanied by downregulation of AR signaling and expression of classical neuroendocrine markers such as chromogranin, synaptophysin. Methylation was significantly different between CRPC patients and CRPC-NE patients, and the combined genomic (TP53, RB1, CYLD, and AR) and epigenetic genomic (hypomethylation or hypermethylation at 20 differential sites) alterations generated targeted sets that were able to identify CRPC-NE patients [49]. In 2022, Berchuck et al. [51] generated a risk prediction model based on methylation immunoprecipitation and high-throughput sequencing analysis of tissue and plasma cfDNA and could distinguish castration-resistant prostate adenocarcinoma from CRPC-NE patients with an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of up to 1.0 in a multi-institutional validation cohort. Multidimensional cfDNA analysis for CRPC-NE will provide a good target for the diagnosis and treatment of PCa drug-resistant phenotypes.

PCa with loss-of-function alterations in DNA damage repair pathways (including BRCA1/2, ATM, and several others) is often associated with more aggressive characteristics and resistance to ADT. Fan et al. [139] found that DNA damage repair pathway genes were altered more frequently in mCRPC patients than in metastatic hormone-sensitive PCa patients (66.7% vs. 41.5%, p=0.015). Annala et al. [140] performed whole-exome and deep-targeted 72-gene sequencing of ctDNA in 202 treatment-naïve mCRPC patients before abiraterone or enzalutamide, and the results showed that in patients with BRCA2/ATM truncating mutation, 69.2% of patients progressed with 12 weeks with a median of time to progression of 1.8 months.

Defects in DNA damage repair pathways also confer sensitivity to PARPi [141]. In phase II clinical trial, Mateo et al. [142] evaluated objective responses to treatment with the PARPi olaparib. NGS analysis of tumor tissue DNA was performed and treatment-sensitive related alterations were identified in BRCA2, ATM, BRCA1, PALB2, CHEK2, FANCA, and HDAC2. These changes above are linked to DNA repair defects. The same group of researchers further investigated the clinical utility of cfDNA analysis. After 4 weeks of treatment with olaparib in mCRPC patients, the cfDNA concentration of treatment responders decreased by 51.4%, which was significantly higher than that of non-responders; and the frequency of cfDNA gene mutation continued to decrease with treatment time. More importantly, they identified several subclonal aberrations that revert germline and somatic DNA repair mutations (BRCA2 and PALB2) in the frame when the disease progressed following response to olaparib. These therapeutically driven aberrations could be the mechanisms of resistance. In a real-world mCRPC case that firstly showed a response to olaparib and then progressed, Yuan et al. [143] also identified two reverse missense mutations in BRCA2 from ctDNA. These two mutations shared the same loci with the germline deleterious variant c.751C>T and restored the open reading frame of BRCA2 and could explain the progressing mechanism during olaparib treatment.

Although tissue-based NSG testing on homologous recombination repair alterations is previously the gold standard, the selection of biopsy sites and preservation of samples could potentially impact the results. The existing multi-clonal foci may also affect the results. The tumor genomic testing for more than 4000 mCRPC tissue samples in the phase III trial PROfound showed that NGS results were obtained more frequently in newly gained (63.9% vs. 56.9%) and metastatic sites (63.9% vs. 56.2%) than archival or primary samples, respectively [144]. In contrast, ctDNA results were successfully reported in 76.8% of patients, and ctDNA showed concordance with tissue-based analysis of HRR mutation status [145]. For patients with ctDNA BRCA or ATM alterations, radiographic progression-free survival was significantly longer among patients who received olaparib, and these improvement results were consistent with tumor tissue testing results [141,145,146]. Another group also showed that the concordance in DNA damage repair gene mutations in primary prostate tissue matched with metastatic tissue and ctDNA findings were 84% [147], suggesting that ctDNA biomarker alone could guide mCRPC patient management [108]. In conclusion, these studies strongly demonstrated that cfDNA analysis is a powerful tool to guide the treatment selection of advanced PCa and monitor treatment response [148].

Immune checkpoint inhibition can reactivate T cells and eliminate cancer cells more efficiently. A growing number of studies have shown that inhibition of PD-1 promotes an effective immune response against cancer cells. It was recently demonstrated that patients with gastric cancer who responded better to immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) therapy had a more than 25% decrease in the maximum somatic VAF in cfDNA [149].

ICIs are still been evaluated in advanced PCa, although the response rate is inferior to other cancer types [150]. Identifying biomarkers that help to predict and monitor ICI monotherapy or combined therapy response is worth exploring [151]. Barata et al. [152] used a commercially available cfDNA NGS assay Guardant 360 and identified 14 microsatellite instability-high metastatic PCa patients. Among them, nine mCRPC patients were treated with pembrolizumab after 0 to 4 prior lines of therapy for CRPC. After a median of 4 weeks of pembrolizumab, four patients achieved 50% PSA decline with three patients having more than 99% PSA decline. The study by Kwan et al. [153] highlighted the potential value of ctDNA in monitoring mCRPC patients treated with avelumab and stereotactic ablative body radiotherapy. Their study suggests that the presence of baseline AR alterations, MYC gain, and high baseline ctDNA scores may be associated with poorer outcomes. More importantly, their study showed an mCRPC patient who had a rise of PSA at 6 weeks and a very nice late PSA response (12 weeks) to avelumab can have a decline in ctDNA as early as 6 weeks, suggesting that ctDNA monitoring can overcome the issue of disease flare or pseudo-progression when first commencing ICI drugs, thus providing accurate evaluation of drug response.

Recently a Canadian group showed that CDK12 (4.4%), ATM (3.0%), and BRCA2 (7.3%) were the most disrupted DNA-damage response gene in mCRPC ctDNA [154]. CDK12 mutated PCa represents a distinct molecular cancer subtype and an aggressive phenotype with high risks of metastasis and short OS [155], while preliminary data showed that these patients may potentially benefit from ICI [156,157]. It's also worth noting that the frequency of CDK12 alteration in Chinese mCRPC patients (15.4%) was significantly higher than that in the Western cohort and all the CDK12 mutations identified in tissue samples were found consistent in ctDNA [139,158]. It implied that ctDNA can help to distinguish CDK12 mutated PCa and Chinese patients may benefit more from ICI treatment. However, more research on cfDNA in the determination of ICI treatment response in PCa patients is still needed.

Tumor heterogeneity may lead to primary or secondary treatment resistance, and the tumor may evolve under treatment pressure. Thus, it's of great importance to monitor treatment response and supervise tumor evolution in a real-time manner. Sumanasuriya et al. [159] conducted low-throughput whole-genome sequencing in mCRPC patients' cfDNA samples undergoing docetaxel or cabazitaxel treatment. These samples were collected at different time points including baseline and cycle 1, cycle 4, and end of the study. They not only just identified that the ctDNA fraction at baseline was significantly associated with OS, radiographic progression-free survival, and PSA-progression-free survival, but also found that the ctDNA fraction remained stable in non-responders during treatment (median 9.7% at baseline, 9.1% on treatment), while exhibited remarkable decrease in responders (median 8.7% at baseline, 0% on treatment). Other researchers have suggested that serum-free GSTP1 methylation levels are also associated with docetaxel treatment response [119]. cfDNA is a promising tool in assessing tumor burden during treatment and identifying potential progression mechanisms. Carson et al. [160] developed a highly multiplexed targeted sequencing DNA methylation-based ctDNA blood test and examined it in a series of longitudinal samples in patients undergoing ADT treatment. It showed that the ctDNA test can be used to assess tumor burden and indicate ADT resistance earlier than the conventional PSA test.

Besides monitoring treatment response, cfDNA also helps to recognize transformation to castration-resistant neuroendocrine PCa and uncover the mechanism of treatment resistance non-invasively [49,51]. Transdifferentiation from adenocarcinoma to neuroendocrine or small cell carcinoma which is a frequent mechanism of treatment resistance involved several key transcription factors [161]. DNA released into circulation is usually generated by nuclease digesting and the ctDNA sequence could be informative of the open chromatin region. A recent study showed transcription factors binding sites could be inferred by cfDNA fragmentation patterns assays and could further implicit the clinical management of PCa [87]. Through analyzing cfDNA fragmentation patterns during the transdifferentiation, Ulz et al. [87] identified the accessibility of AR, HOXB13, NKX3-1, GRHL2, and REST binding sites was reduced, and this was consistent with a previous report that REST downregulation was in up to 50% of castration-resistant neuroendocrine PCa [162]. It shows that cfDNA could help in monitoring the reprogramming process through a non-invasive method.

cfDNA also assists in tracking subclones with a selective advantage; this will provide us with a better understanding of tumor dynamics during treatment and progression. By applying whole-exome sequencing and WGBS of cfDNA, researchers identified CRPC-NE associated genetic (TP53, RB1, CYLD, and AR) and epigenetic (hypo- and hyper-methylation of 20 differential sites) markers [49]. More importantly, during the transdifferentiation from CRPC-adenocarcinoma to CRPC-NE, they identified a ctDNA profile similar to a CRPC-NE liver metastasis 3 months earlier before imaging was observed and biopsy-confirmed. This emphasized that dominant subclone ctDNA patterns were detectable earlier before developed clinical features [49].

### AR pathway

AR is a master regulator of PCa. Targeting the androgen pathway is still the cornerstone for advanced PCa. Several novel androgen pathway inhibitors have been adopted in clinical practice and significantly improved survival for metastasis or relapsed PCa. AR gain, mutations, and genomic structural rearrangements have been reported to be associated with castration resistance [131]. The limited number of studies available suggest that it is possible to detect AR genomic events and AR splice variants in cfDNA [[132], [133], [134], [135], [136]], and AR is the second most frequently altered (42%) gene in mCRPC ctDNA [129], thus making ctDNA of great value in predicting the effectiveness of anti-androgen therapies. In mCRPC patients undergoing enzalutamide treatment, Wyatt et al. [134] detected AR mutations and/or CNVs in 48% of patients at baseline and 60% of patients at progression. Further univariable analysis between baseline characteristics and progression-free survival showed that detection of AR amplification (HR: 2.72, p=0.008), heavily mutated AR (more than two mutations) (HR: 3.94, p=0.007) were statistically associated with worse progression-free survival, outperforming Gleason score (HR: 1.26, p=0.45) and lymph node metastases status (HR: 1.59, p=0.12). It has also been demonstrated that AR gain cfDNA correlated with AR splice variant 7 (AR-V7) in exosomes and both of them can predict resistance to AR signaling inhibitors [137]. cfDNA analysis could provide information to select patients more likely to benefit from antiandrogen treatment and those who should consider alternative therapies [138].

About 15%–20% of advanced treatment-resistant PCa will histologically progress to castration-resistant neuroendocrine prostate cancer (CRPC-NE) with a worse prognosis, which is often accompanied by downregulation of AR signaling and expression of classical neuroendocrine markers such as chromogranin, synaptophysin. Methylation was significantly different between CRPC patients and CRPC-NE patients, and the combined genomic (TP53, RB1, CYLD, and AR) and epigenetic genomic (hypomethylation or hypermethylation at 20 differential sites) alterations generated targeted sets that were able to identify CRPC-NE patients [49]. In 2022, Berchuck et al. [51] generated a risk prediction model based on methylation immunoprecipitation and high-throughput sequencing analysis of tissue and plasma cfDNA and could distinguish castration-resistant prostate adenocarcinoma from CRPC-NE patients with an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of up to 1.0 in a multi-institutional validation cohort. Multidimensional cfDNA analysis for CRPC-NE will provide a good target for the diagnosis and treatment of PCa drug-resistant phenotypes.

### DNA-damage response pathway

PCa with loss-of-function alterations in DNA damage repair pathways (including BRCA1/2, ATM, and several others) is often associated with more aggressive characteristics and resistance to ADT. Fan et al. [139] found that DNA damage repair pathway genes were altered more frequently in mCRPC patients than in metastatic hormone-sensitive PCa patients (66.7% vs. 41.5%, p=0.015). Annala et al. [140] performed whole-exome and deep-targeted 72-gene sequencing of ctDNA in 202 treatment-naïve mCRPC patients before abiraterone or enzalutamide, and the results showed that in patients with BRCA2/ATM truncating mutation, 69.2% of patients progressed with 12 weeks with a median of time to progression of 1.8 months.

Defects in DNA damage repair pathways also confer sensitivity to PARPi [141]. In phase II clinical trial, Mateo et al. [142] evaluated objective responses to treatment with the PARPi olaparib. NGS analysis of tumor tissue DNA was performed and treatment-sensitive related alterations were identified in BRCA2, ATM, BRCA1, PALB2, CHEK2, FANCA, and HDAC2. These changes above are linked to DNA repair defects. The same group of researchers further investigated the clinical utility of cfDNA analysis. After 4 weeks of treatment with olaparib in mCRPC patients, the cfDNA concentration of treatment responders decreased by 51.4%, which was significantly higher than that of non-responders; and the frequency of cfDNA gene mutation continued to decrease with treatment time. More importantly, they identified several subclonal aberrations that revert germline and somatic DNA repair mutations (BRCA2 and PALB2) in the frame when the disease progressed following response to olaparib. These therapeutically driven aberrations could be the mechanisms of resistance. In a real-world mCRPC case that firstly showed a response to olaparib and then progressed, Yuan et al. [143] also identified two reverse missense mutations in BRCA2 from ctDNA. These two mutations shared the same loci with the germline deleterious variant c.751C>T and restored the open reading frame of BRCA2 and could explain the progressing mechanism during olaparib treatment.

Although tissue-based NSG testing on homologous recombination repair alterations is previously the gold standard, the selection of biopsy sites and preservation of samples could potentially impact the results. The existing multi-clonal foci may also affect the results. The tumor genomic testing for more than 4000 mCRPC tissue samples in the phase III trial PROfound showed that NGS results were obtained more frequently in newly gained (63.9% vs. 56.9%) and metastatic sites (63.9% vs. 56.2%) than archival or primary samples, respectively [144]. In contrast, ctDNA results were successfully reported in 76.8% of patients, and ctDNA showed concordance with tissue-based analysis of HRR mutation status [145]. For patients with ctDNA BRCA or ATM alterations, radiographic progression-free survival was significantly longer among patients who received olaparib, and these improvement results were consistent with tumor tissue testing results [141,145,146]. Another group also showed that the concordance in DNA damage repair gene mutations in primary prostate tissue matched with metastatic tissue and ctDNA findings were 84% [147], suggesting that ctDNA biomarker alone could guide mCRPC patient management [108]. In conclusion, these studies strongly demonstrated that cfDNA analysis is a powerful tool to guide the treatment selection of advanced PCa and monitor treatment response [148].

### CDK12 alterations and immunotherapy

Immune checkpoint inhibition can reactivate T cells and eliminate cancer cells more efficiently. A growing number of studies have shown that inhibition of PD-1 promotes an effective immune response against cancer cells. It was recently demonstrated that patients with gastric cancer who responded better to immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) therapy had a more than 25% decrease in the maximum somatic VAF in cfDNA [149].

ICIs are still been evaluated in advanced PCa, although the response rate is inferior to other cancer types [150]. Identifying biomarkers that help to predict and monitor ICI monotherapy or combined therapy response is worth exploring [151]. Barata et al. [152] used a commercially available cfDNA NGS assay Guardant 360 and identified 14 microsatellite instability-high metastatic PCa patients. Among them, nine mCRPC patients were treated with pembrolizumab after 0 to 4 prior lines of therapy for CRPC. After a median of 4 weeks of pembrolizumab, four patients achieved 50% PSA decline with three patients having more than 99% PSA decline. The study by Kwan et al. [153] highlighted the potential value of ctDNA in monitoring mCRPC patients treated with avelumab and stereotactic ablative body radiotherapy. Their study suggests that the presence of baseline AR alterations, MYC gain, and high baseline ctDNA scores may be associated with poorer outcomes. More importantly, their study showed an mCRPC patient who had a rise of PSA at 6 weeks and a very nice late PSA response (12 weeks) to avelumab can have a decline in ctDNA as early as 6 weeks, suggesting that ctDNA monitoring can overcome the issue of disease flare or pseudo-progression when first commencing ICI drugs, thus providing accurate evaluation of drug response.

Recently a Canadian group showed that CDK12 (4.4%), ATM (3.0%), and BRCA2 (7.3%) were the most disrupted DNA-damage response gene in mCRPC ctDNA [154]. CDK12 mutated PCa represents a distinct molecular cancer subtype and an aggressive phenotype with high risks of metastasis and short OS [155], while preliminary data showed that these patients may potentially benefit from ICI [156,157]. It's also worth noting that the frequency of CDK12 alteration in Chinese mCRPC patients (15.4%) was significantly higher than that in the Western cohort and all the CDK12 mutations identified in tissue samples were found consistent in ctDNA [139,158]. It implied that ctDNA can help to distinguish CDK12 mutated PCa and Chinese patients may benefit more from ICI treatment. However, more research on cfDNA in the determination of ICI treatment response in PCa patients is still needed.

### Real-time monitoring during treatment

Tumor heterogeneity may lead to primary or secondary treatment resistance, and the tumor may evolve under treatment pressure. Thus, it's of great importance to monitor treatment response and supervise tumor evolution in a real-time manner. Sumanasuriya et al. [159] conducted low-throughput whole-genome sequencing in mCRPC patients' cfDNA samples undergoing docetaxel or cabazitaxel treatment. These samples were collected at different time points including baseline and cycle 1, cycle 4, and end of the study. They not only just identified that the ctDNA fraction at baseline was significantly associated with OS, radiographic progression-free survival, and PSA-progression-free survival, but also found that the ctDNA fraction remained stable in non-responders during treatment (median 9.7% at baseline, 9.1% on treatment), while exhibited remarkable decrease in responders (median 8.7% at baseline, 0% on treatment). Other researchers have suggested that serum-free GSTP1 methylation levels are also associated with docetaxel treatment response [119]. cfDNA is a promising tool in assessing tumor burden during treatment and identifying potential progression mechanisms. Carson et al. [160] developed a highly multiplexed targeted sequencing DNA methylation-based ctDNA blood test and examined it in a series of longitudinal samples in patients undergoing ADT treatment. It showed that the ctDNA test can be used to assess tumor burden and indicate ADT resistance earlier than the conventional PSA test.

Besides monitoring treatment response, cfDNA also helps to recognize transformation to castration-resistant neuroendocrine PCa and uncover the mechanism of treatment resistance non-invasively [49,51]. Transdifferentiation from adenocarcinoma to neuroendocrine or small cell carcinoma which is a frequent mechanism of treatment resistance involved several key transcription factors [161]. DNA released into circulation is usually generated by nuclease digesting and the ctDNA sequence could be informative of the open chromatin region. A recent study showed transcription factors binding sites could be inferred by cfDNA fragmentation patterns assays and could further implicit the clinical management of PCa [87]. Through analyzing cfDNA fragmentation patterns during the transdifferentiation, Ulz et al. [87] identified the accessibility of AR, HOXB13, NKX3-1, GRHL2, and REST binding sites was reduced, and this was consistent with a previous report that REST downregulation was in up to 50% of castration-resistant neuroendocrine PCa [162]. It shows that cfDNA could help in monitoring the reprogramming process through a non-invasive method.

cfDNA also assists in tracking subclones with a selective advantage; this will provide us with a better understanding of tumor dynamics during treatment and progression. By applying whole-exome sequencing and WGBS of cfDNA, researchers identified CRPC-NE associated genetic (TP53, RB1, CYLD, and AR) and epigenetic (hypo- and hyper-methylation of 20 differential sites) markers [49]. More importantly, during the transdifferentiation from CRPC-adenocarcinoma to CRPC-NE, they identified a ctDNA profile similar to a CRPC-NE liver metastasis 3 months earlier before imaging was observed and biopsy-confirmed. This emphasized that dominant subclone ctDNA patterns were detectable earlier before developed clinical features [49].

### MRD identification

cfDNA MRD detection has been developed in breast cancer [16,163], lung cancer [164], colon cancer [165], bladder cancer [166], etc. Recently, researchers have developed a test to track hundreds of patient-specific mutations to detect MRD from peripheral blood, which will help improve the treatment of patients with early-stage breast cancer [163]. There are still very few studies using cfDNA to predict MRD in PCa, possibly due to the low abundance of ctDNA after definitive treatment. In this regard, the future trend of PCa MRD identification might be compensated by an ultra-sensitive method including ctDNA methylation analysis.

### Conclusion

PCa is the second most common diagnosed cancer and one of the leading causes of cancer-related death worldwide [1]. The incidence and mortality rates of PCa have grown rapidly in Asia and South America countries, and certain countries in Eastern Europe, thus making PCa early diagnosis of great importance [1]. In recent years, great progress has been made in the therapy of advanced prostate, including next-generation hormonal agents, chemotherapy, PARPi, ICIs, radionuclides [167,168], and potentially “antibody–drug conjugates” in the future [169].

cfDNA is a kind of circulating nucleic acid with many sources and good accessibility. The detection based on cfDNA can not only measure the concentration of cfDNA but also analyze its genetic, epigenetic, and fragmentation characteristics, which undoubtedly will be the new dawn of biomarkers. cfDNA has a wide range of applications; it can assist in the early screening and early diagnosis of PCa (Table 1). In addition, it is more valuable in the clinical management, which can also be used for prognostic evaluation in the treatment stage, to predict postoperative recurrence and metastasis, or to predict drug resistance and monitor treatment response (Table 2). It is expected to replace or supplement the current diagnosis and treatment methods.Table 1cfDNA in PCa screening and detection.Table 1ReferenceCohort (n)ResourceResultsMethodHennigan et al., 2019 [58]-Localized PCa (112)Plasma- Low abundance of cfDNA in localized PCaULP WGSChen et al., 2021 [85]-HD (34)Plasma (7–55 mL)- cfDNA fragment size may be an alternative that can differentiate PCa patients from HDQuantitative real-time PCR-Localized PCa (112)-mCRPC (122)Salvi et al., 2015 [96]-PCa (67)Urine (30 mL)- UCF-DNA integrity showed lower accuracy than PSA for early PCa diagnosisQuantitative real-time PCR-Benign diseases of the urogenital tract (64)Constâncio et al., 2019 [73]-Lung cancer (102)Plasma- Methylation analysis of FOXA1, RARβ2, RASSF1A, GSTP1, and SOX17 facilitated early detection of PCaWGBS-PCa (121)-Colorectal cancer (100)-HD (136)Bryzgunova et al., 2021 [74]-PCa (20)Plasma (2 mL)- GSTP1 and RNF219 gene methylation analysis differentiated PCa patients from HDLocus-specific NGS-HD (18)-BPH (17)Tomeva et al., 2022 [75]-PCa (27)Plasma- Androgen receptor mutation p.H875Y associated with cfDNA methylation and circulating miRNAs to distinguish PCa patients from HDQuantitative real-time PCR-HD (15)Cario et al., 2020 [90]-PCa (550)Public data from the ICGC- Optimizing cfDNA mutation detection performance based on machine learningUsing machine learning to optimize targeted sequencing panelsBrikun et al., 2019 [93]-Patients with elevated PSA (94)Urine- Methylation of HOXD3, HOXA7, GPR62, and KLK10 were candidates for early detection markers of PCaSemi-quantitative PCRChen et al., 2021 [91]-Localized PCa (21)Plasma- Targeted cfDNA sequencing identifies mutations in FOXA1, PTEN, MED12, and ATM to detect localized PCaTargeted and low-pass WGS-HD (15)-mCRPC (9)PCa, prostate cancer; cfDNA, circulating cell-free DNA; UCF-DNA, urine cell-free DNA; mCRPC, metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer; HD, healthy donor; PSA, prostate-specific antigen; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; BPH, benign prostatic hyperplasia; NGS, next-generation sequencing; ICGC, International Cancer Genome Consortium; ULP, ultra-low-pass; WGS, whole-genome sequencing; WGBS, whole-genome bisulfite sequencing.Table 2cfDNA in PCa risk stratification and monitoring.Table 2ReferenceCohort (n)ResourceResultsMethodKubota et al., 2021 [101]-HD (47)Plasma (1 mL)-High cfDNA and AR-amp-high were significantly associated with poor OS in CRPCQuantitative real-time PCR-Localized PCa with ADT (57)-CSPC with ADT (97)-CRPC (97)Kohli et al., 2020 [103]-Independent patients (4; untreated mHSPC and mCRPC)Plasma-TP53 mutation, RB1 loss, and AR gene amplification were associated with poor OS in mCRPCNGSLau et al., 2020 [128]-Localized PCaPlasma-ctDNA TP53 mutations were associated with significantly shorter metastasis-free survivalWGS and TAm-Seq(prospectively; 8)-PCa(retrospective; 189)Bjerre et al., 2020 [50]-HD (36)Plasma-Methylated ctDNA (DOCK2/HAPLN3/FBXO30) was associated with a significantly shorter time to progression or metastasisMS-ddPCR-BPH (61)-Localized PCa (102)-Metastatic PCa (65)Del Re et al., 2021 [137]-mCRPC (84; 40 abiraterone, 44 enzalutamide)Plasma (10 mL)-AR gain in cfDNA predicted resistance to AR signaling inhibitorsddPCRHussain et al., 2020 [146]-Olaparib (256 patients)Plasma-At least one alteration in BRCA1, BRCA2, or ATM responded better to olaparibNGS-based FoundationOne CDx (Foundation Medicine, USA)-Enzalutamide or abiraterone plus prednisone (131 patients)Reimers et al., 2020 [155]-Advanced PCa (317; 172 tumor tissue, 145 ctDNA)Tissue and plasma-Patients with CDK12 mutant PCa exhibited a shorter time to metastasisNGSSumanasuriya et al., 2021 [159]-mCRPC (188)Plasma-Longitudinal changes in ctDNA fraction enabled monitoring of drug responselpWGSBeltran et al., 2020 [49]-Metastatic PCa (10)Plasma-Combination of genomic (TP53, RB1, CYLD, and AR) and epigenomic alterations applied to ctDNA identifies patients with CRPC-NEWES and WGBS-CRPC (35)-CRPC-NE (17)cfDNA, circulating cell-free DNA; ctDNA, circulating tumor DNA; HD, healthy donor; BPH, benign prostatic hyperplasia; PCa, prostate cancer; ADT, androgen deprivation therapy; CSPC, castration-sensitive prostate cancer; CRPC, castration-resistant prostate cancer; mCRPC, metastatic CRPC; CRPC-NE, castration-resistant neuroendocrine prostate cancer; mHSPC, metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer; AR-amp, androgen receptor amplification; OS, overall survival; NGS, next-generation sequencing; TAm-Seq, tagged-amplicon deep sequencing; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; MS-ddPCR, methylation-specific droplet digital PCR; ddPCR, droplet digital PCR; WGS, whole-genome sequencing; lpWGS, low-pass WGS; WES, whole-exome sequencing; WGBS, whole-genome bisulfite sequencing.

cfDNA in PCa screening and detection.

Localized PCa (112)

Plasma

HD (34)

Plasma (7–55 mL)

Localized PCa (112)

mCRPC (122)

PCa (67)

Urine (30 mL)

Benign diseases of the urogenital tract (64)

Lung cancer (102)

Plasma

PCa (121)

Colorectal cancer (100)

HD (136)

PCa (20)

Plasma (2 mL)

HD (18)

BPH (17)

PCa (27)

Plasma

HD (15)

PCa (550)

Public data from the ICGC

Patients with elevated PSA (94)

Urine

Localized PCa (21)

Plasma

HD (15)

mCRPC (9)

PCa, prostate cancer; cfDNA, circulating cell-free DNA; UCF-DNA, urine cell-free DNA; mCRPC, metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer; HD, healthy donor; PSA, prostate-specific antigen; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; BPH, benign prostatic hyperplasia; NGS, next-generation sequencing; ICGC, International Cancer Genome Consortium; ULP, ultra-low-pass; WGS, whole-genome sequencing; WGBS, whole-genome bisulfite sequencing.

cfDNA in PCa risk stratification and monitoring.

HD (47)

High cfDNA and AR-amp-high were significantly associated with poor OS in CRPC

Localized PCa with ADT (57)

CSPC with ADT (97)

CRPC (97)

Independent patients (4; untreated mHSPC and mCRPC)

TP53 mutation, RB1 loss, and AR gene amplification were associated with poor OS in mCRPC

Localized PCa

ctDNA TP53 mutations were associated with significantly shorter metastasis-free survival

(prospectively; 8)

PCa

(retrospective; 189)

HD (36)

Methylated ctDNA (DOCK2/HAPLN3/FBXO30) was associated with a significantly shorter time to progression or metastasis

BPH (61)

Localized PCa (102)

Metastatic PCa (65)

mCRPC (84; 40 abiraterone, 44 enzalutamide)

AR gain in cfDNA predicted resistance to AR signaling inhibitors

Olaparib (256 patients)

At least one alteration in BRCA1, BRCA2, or ATM responded better to olaparib

Enzalutamide or abiraterone plus prednisone (131 patients)

Advanced PCa (317; 172 tumor tissue, 145 ctDNA)

Patients with CDK12 mutant PCa exhibited a shorter time to metastasis

mCRPC (188)

Longitudinal changes in ctDNA fraction enabled monitoring of drug response

Metastatic PCa (10)

Combination of genomic (TP53, RB1, CYLD, and AR) and epigenomic alterations applied to ctDNA identifies patients with CRPC-NE

CRPC (35)

CRPC-NE (17)

cfDNA, circulating cell-free DNA; ctDNA, circulating tumor DNA; HD, healthy donor; BPH, benign prostatic hyperplasia; PCa, prostate cancer; ADT, androgen deprivation therapy; CSPC, castration-sensitive prostate cancer; CRPC, castration-resistant prostate cancer; mCRPC, metastatic CRPC; CRPC-NE, castration-resistant neuroendocrine prostate cancer; mHSPC, metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer; AR-amp, androgen receptor amplification; OS, overall survival; NGS, next-generation sequencing; TAm-Seq, tagged-amplicon deep sequencing; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; MS-ddPCR, methylation-specific droplet digital PCR; ddPCR, droplet digital PCR; WGS, whole-genome sequencing; lpWGS, low-pass WGS; WES, whole-exome sequencing; WGBS, whole-genome bisulfite sequencing.

There are currently more than 60 clinical trials related to PCa using cfDNA or ctDNA registered at ClinicalTrials.gov database (Table 3). Notably, most of the clinical trials were designed to evaluate the role of cfDNA testing in guiding the clinical management of advanced PCa. In two large ongoing basket clinical trials, patients are assigned to different treatment based on their cfDNA signatures. Researchers are attempting to assess the role of ctDNA as a marker of treatment selection in patients with mCRPC (NCT03903835; NCT03385655). There is also a phase 2 study of treatment selection strategies using the ctDNA score as a predictive biomarker to guide treatment decisions (NCT04015622). In addition, a phase 4 study to explore 73 PCa-driven gene alterations in patients with metastatic castration-sensitive PCa during apalutamide treatment using plasma ctDNA is enrolling (NCT04601441). Research on ctDNA monitoring for predicting and assessing treatment response is also underway (NCT05116579). In contrast, the number of clinical trials using cfDNA to detect early-stage PCa patients is very limited. A study that attempted to determine whether copy number instability (CNI score) derived from cfDNA analysis could identify malignancy in patients undergoing prostate biopsy was discontinued in 2020 (NCT02771769).Table 3Selective clinical trials of cfDNA or ctDNA in PCa.Table 3No.ClinicalTrials.gov NCT numberConditionPurposeStatusPhase1NCT04015622mCRPC- PCa treatment optimization via analysis of ctDNARecruitingPhase 22NCT04601441mCSPC- Evaluate changes in genomic alterations for 73 PCa driver genes during apalutamide treatmentRecruitingPhase 43NCT03228810Metastatic PCa- Detect and calculate ctDNA in relation to metastasis-directed radiation and ADTCompletedNA4NCT05116579mCRPC- Evaluate the application value of customized ctDNA monitoring in efficacy assessment and prediction during PARPi treatmentRecruitingNA5NCT03903835mCRPC- Prolong progression-free survival by measuring ctDNA in plasma and adapting the treatment accordinglyRecruitingPhase 36NCT02771769Men with elevated PSA levels- Determine whether copy number instability scores derived from the cfDNA correlates with PSA screening levels and prostate biopsy resultsTerminatedNA7NCT04081428Localized PCa- Using breath, cfDNA, and image analysis to predict normal tissue and tumor response during PCa SBRTRecruitingNA8NCT03385655mCRPC- cfDNA helped predict which patients are most likely to be helped by the drugsRecruitingPhase 29NCT04580667Untreated PCa- Develop a new test of cfDNA to identify PCa patients at the highest risk of radiotherapy-related complications, especially those related to GI toxicitiesRecruitingNA10NCT05245435Primary oligometastatic PCa- Study the diagnostic and prognostic accuracy and health economics considerations of cfDNARecruitingNAcfDNA, circulating cell-free DNA; ctDNA, circulating tumor DNA; ADT, androgen deprivation therapy; PARPi, poly ADP-ribose polymerase inhibitor; PCa, prostate cancer; PSA, prostate specific antigen; SBRT, stereotactic body radiotherapy; GI, gastrointestinal; mCRPC, metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer; mCSPC, metastatic castration-sensitive prostate cancer; NA, not applicable.

Selective clinical trials of cfDNA or ctDNA in PCa.

cfDNA, circulating cell-free DNA; ctDNA, circulating tumor DNA; ADT, androgen deprivation therapy; PARPi, poly ADP-ribose polymerase inhibitor; PCa, prostate cancer; PSA, prostate specific antigen; SBRT, stereotactic body radiotherapy; GI, gastrointestinal; mCRPC, metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer; mCSPC, metastatic castration-sensitive prostate cancer; NA, not applicable.

cfDNA concentration and ctDNA fraction can be used in PCa screen and early detection. However, this is often hindered by the low abundance of cfDNA at the early stage. Aberrant DNA methylation can occur at a very early stage in the formation of malignancy and these alterations often appear to be cancer-specific. cfMeDIP-seq has been adopted in renal cell carcinoma [170,171], brain cancer [56], and lung cancer [172]. However, this technology has not been reported to be widely used in the PCa research area. As it can analyze ctDNA methylation patterns at a low input [51], it can be expected that this will be used in the early detection and risk classification of PCa in the future.

High concordance between tumor tissue and ctDNA favors the development of ctDNA-based testing as a non-invasive way to identify patients with specific molecular features including gene mutation, aberrant methylation profile, and fragmentation patterns. For advanced or late-stage PCa, obtaining fresh tissue samples is often impractical in clinical practice, although for early genomic events such as BRCA aberrations or PTEN loss, the use of archived primary PCa tissues may be a reasonable option. These tumors may evolve and progress rapidly under treatment pressure that leads to inter-and intra-tumor heterogeneity. Patients often undergo several lines of treatment, and then leveraging ctDNA to guide the management of these patients is an alternative approach, which can provide real-time and continuous molecular information. As cfDNA analysis is non-invasive and easily repeated, it will further help to guide treatment decisions, especially for those with insufficient tissue for genomic analyses [173].

It has become increasingly significant that patients with specific genetic alterations may benefit from a certain type of treatment. A multicenter study in 2021 reported that AR amplification and TP53 and/or RB1 alterations are associated with resistance to abiraterone or docetaxel. Interestingly, CDK12-deficient patients responded poorly to abiraterone, whereas BRCA2-deficient patients responded significantly to both PARPi and platinum-based chemotherapy [158]. Several genetic aberrations have been studied intensively in recent years, including AR, TP53, Rb, BRCA1/2, and CDK12. Among them, CDK12 has drawn great attention, partially due to the advancement of immune therapy and PARPi [174].

A pan-cancer analysis of 26 743 patients across 25 solid tumor types showed that CDK12 alteration was most frequently in PCa than the other cancer types (100/1875, 5.3%) [175]. CDK12 altered PCa patients showed an aggressive phenotype, with higher PSA at diagnosis (median 14.8 ng/mL vs. 9.0 ng/mL), a higher proportion of Gleason score greater than or equal to 8 (80% vs. 57%), higher prevalence of metastasis at baseline (40% vs. 26%), and shorter OS (median 64.4 month vs. 74.9 month) [175]. However, patients with CDK12 alteration may significantly benefit from PARPi or ICI. Besides AR, BRCA1/2, and CDK12, other genomic alterations including TP53, RB1, SPOP, FOXA1, and PTEN were also found in ctDNA. Further research on precision medicine for these patients should also be emphasized.

Besides, ctDNA originated from the endonuclease genome, detecting and analyzing circulating cell-free mitochondrial DNA may also warrant further investigation [176]. In addition, further deep research on the biological function, and the generation and elimination of ctDNA in plasma will also shed light on the ctDNA clinical application.

For many years, the bottleneck in cfDNA detection has been limited in its signal strength and quality, making it very dependent on detection methodologies. However, with the in-depth understanding of circulating nucleic acids and the development of new research platforms, cfDNA methylation analysis stands out among many analysis strategies due to its stability and homogeneity and is a promising key direction in the future. Although ctDNA abundance can assist in therapeutic monitoring, the reduction in ctDNA concentration following ADT treatment or chemotherapy rapidly reduces cfDNA availability [177]. This also urges comprehensive and multi-modal assessment of cfDNA and other biomarkers to provide a deep comprehensive understanding of PCa progression. In addition, the combined analysis of markers or information at different latitudes through machine learning is also a new approach. On the whole, with the standardization of cfDNA detecting and analyzing assays, it is anticipated that cfDNA will provide more options for improving PCa diagnosis and treatment decisions.

### Author contributions

Study concept and design: Shancheng Ren, Yasheng Zhu.

Literature search and summary: Wei He, Shi Yan, Yutian Xiao.

Manuscript writing and revision: Wei He, Yasheng Zhu.

Figures preparation: Yasheng Zhu, Yutian Xiao.

### Conflicts of interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.



# SUPPLEMENTAL FILE 1: main.pdf

# Preparing to download ...

[HHS Vulnerability Disclosure](https://www.hhs.gov/vulnerability-disclosure-policy/index.html)