# MAIN TEXT

## Refining the interpretation of variants of uncertain significance in hereditary cancer screening through integrated RNA sequencing

### Abstract

PurposeAlthough up to 25% of germline variants are predicted to affect splicing, most are classified as variants of uncertain significance (VUS) because of the limited understanding of their functional consequences. Here, we investigated the impact of RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data on the ability to resolve splicing-related VUS.MethodsPatients with VUS predicted to alter splicing identified through commercial hereditary cancer testing between October 2021 to July 2023 were included. RNA-seq was used to compare splicing patterns between patient blood samples and normal controls. VUS reclassification rates were calculated.ResultsIn total, 411 VUS in 52 genes predicted to affect splicing were included. RNA-seq results resolved 26.3% (108/411) of the VUS: 28 (6.8%) upgraded to pathogenic/likely pathogenic, and 80 (19.5%) downgraded to not reportable. Among the 28 upgraded, 17 (60.7%) were intronic, 9 (32.1%) were exonic missense variants, and 2 (7.1%) were exonic synonymous variants. Most of the VUS downgraded to not reportable were intronic (64/80, 80%). The remaining 16 (20%) of the downgraded VUS were synonymous variants.ConclusionThis study underscores the utility of RNA-seq to detect variants that affect splicing and could have an impact on cancer risk assessment management and treatment.

### Introduction

Identifying individuals with a hereditary predisposition to cancer allows for clinical interventions with the goal of preventing cancer or early detection.1, 2, 3 Germline genetic testing for hereditary cancer syndromes using multigene panel tests (MGPTs) has become increasingly common.4 Prominent medical societies have recommended genetic testing for hereditary cancer genes in individuals with a family history of cancer.5, 6, 7 The increased use of MGPTs for hereditary cancer has led to a rise in the detection of variants of uncertain significance (VUS), with an estimated 44% of variants being classified as VUS.8,9 Although guidance from professional societies indicates that a VUS should not change clinical management,9, 10, 11 they do carry up to 10% risk of being reclassified as pathogenic/likely pathogenic (P/LP). This can lead to diagnostic delays and challenges in risk management decision-making.12,13 Furthermore, the impact of disclosing VUS results to patients has led to patient concern and provider distrust.14,15 Taken together, these observations indicate that there is a critical need to understand and find ways to resolve VUS that result from MGPTs.

Aberrant splicing is a well-established cause of disease16,17; yet, the prediction of splicing events from traditional sequencing is difficult given that functional data, in addition to clinical data, are required to demonstrate pathogenicity. Previous reports have found that up to 25% of DNA variants in genes associated with hereditary cancer disrupt RNA splicing; however, a majority are classified as VUS because of the lack of functional RNA evidence.18, 19, 20 Over the past 5 years, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) has been increasingly incorporated into clinical germline genetic testing for hereditary cancer.21, 22, 23, 24, 25 Previous work has focused mainly on understanding the broad impact of RNA-seq-based variant reclassification across all tested cases. In this study, we report on our experience of incorporating RNA-seq results into variant interpretation of VUS that are predicted to be affected by disrupted RNA splicing. We hypothesize that these VUS can be detected in different types of variants (such as missense variants, synonymous variants, and intronic variants), rather than limited to a specific variant type.

### Materials and Methods

Patients who underwent clinician-ordered hereditary cancer screening through a commercial laboratory (Empower, Natera, Inc) from October 2021 to July 2023 were eligible to be included in this retrospective analysis. Patients who received reflex RNA-seq after detection of a VUS predicted to affect RNA splicing outside of the canonical splice site in a loss-of-function gene were included. In total, we identified 7904 VUS during this time period.

This study was granted a waiver of consent process and of the requirement for documentation of informed consent under 45 CFR 46.116(c)(d) under the local institutional review board determination (Salus institutional review board, ID #21204-01A).

The hereditary cancer genetic test was performed using capture-based enrichment followed by next-generation sequencing (NGS; Illumina). Multiplex gene panels were used and carried out at a commercial laboratory in the United States (Empower, Natera, Inc in collaboration with Baylor Genetics). All VUS underwent assessment by in silico splicing prediction algorithms (SpliceAI, Alamut) using default settings.26 VUS predicted to affect RNA splicing by SpliceAI (ie, receiving a Δ score of ≥0.2) and by visual Alamut prediction, were subsequently subjected to RNA-seq. VUS that did not meet these criteria did not undergo RNA-seq and were excluded from further analyses.

RNA-seq was completed via capture-based NGS to perform messenger RNA sequencing according to the standard operating procedures. For each VUS, the ratio of junction reads representing normal splicing versus abnormal splicing was calculated. Normal splicing was established using a set of 8 healthy control cases. Levels of expected abnormal splicing events were evaluated based on the ratio of junction reads representing normal splicing and abnormal splicing in the context of the reference transcript. Differences between levels of normal and aberrant splicing were calculated using the t test (when repeated samples were available) or the Grubbs test (when a single sample was available), with statistically significant differences defined as P ≤ .05.

Aberrant RNA splicing data were incorporated into other lines of evidence for VUS pathogenicity by following guidelines.10,27 Normal splicing data were used as evidence of neutrality. Specifically, after RNA-seq, variants were subjected to the following criteria for variant reclassification: (1) the variant showed significant aberrant splicing (>40%) that was absent in controls, or (2) the variant was present in some controls at a low level (<10%) but exhibited a significantly higher level in the case with a net change of >40%, and (3) the variant must result in an out-of-frame protein impact or, if the protein impact is an in-frame deletion, it must either delete more than 10% of the protein, involve P/LP missense variants in the deleted region, or affect a critical functional domain. Finally, (4) there should be no conflicting functional evidence in the literature. VUS were downgraded if (1) there is no significant splicing change (0%-10%) and (2) heterozygous informative SNPs help rule out nonsense-mediated decay. VUS retain its classification if (1) there is an incomplete splicing change (10%-40%), or (2) the variant causes an in-frame deletion without any functional impact, or (3) the variant is a missense without a splicing change, and further downgrading is not possible. Updated reports were proactively issued to providers if the classification of the VUS is changed based on the RNA-seq results.

VUS were characterized based on variant location, variant type (intronic, exonic missense, and exonic synonymous), and gene. Subsequent variant interpretation results were summarized for all VUS and then by variant location and type. Variants that were reclassified as P/LP or not reportable were compared with variant interpretation in ClinVar to determine whether the new classification was novel.

### Study cohort

Patients who underwent clinician-ordered hereditary cancer screening through a commercial laboratory (Empower, Natera, Inc) from October 2021 to July 2023 were eligible to be included in this retrospective analysis. Patients who received reflex RNA-seq after detection of a VUS predicted to affect RNA splicing outside of the canonical splice site in a loss-of-function gene were included. In total, we identified 7904 VUS during this time period.

This study was granted a waiver of consent process and of the requirement for documentation of informed consent under 45 CFR 46.116(c)(d) under the local institutional review board determination (Salus institutional review board, ID #21204-01A).

### Next-generation sequencing of DNA and RNA

The hereditary cancer genetic test was performed using capture-based enrichment followed by next-generation sequencing (NGS; Illumina). Multiplex gene panels were used and carried out at a commercial laboratory in the United States (Empower, Natera, Inc in collaboration with Baylor Genetics). All VUS underwent assessment by in silico splicing prediction algorithms (SpliceAI, Alamut) using default settings.26 VUS predicted to affect RNA splicing by SpliceAI (ie, receiving a Δ score of ≥0.2) and by visual Alamut prediction, were subsequently subjected to RNA-seq. VUS that did not meet these criteria did not undergo RNA-seq and were excluded from further analyses.

RNA-seq was completed via capture-based NGS to perform messenger RNA sequencing according to the standard operating procedures. For each VUS, the ratio of junction reads representing normal splicing versus abnormal splicing was calculated. Normal splicing was established using a set of 8 healthy control cases. Levels of expected abnormal splicing events were evaluated based on the ratio of junction reads representing normal splicing and abnormal splicing in the context of the reference transcript. Differences between levels of normal and aberrant splicing were calculated using the t test (when repeated samples were available) or the Grubbs test (when a single sample was available), with statistically significant differences defined as P ≤ .05.

Aberrant RNA splicing data were incorporated into other lines of evidence for VUS pathogenicity by following guidelines.10,27 Normal splicing data were used as evidence of neutrality. Specifically, after RNA-seq, variants were subjected to the following criteria for variant reclassification: (1) the variant showed significant aberrant splicing (>40%) that was absent in controls, or (2) the variant was present in some controls at a low level (<10%) but exhibited a significantly higher level in the case with a net change of >40%, and (3) the variant must result in an out-of-frame protein impact or, if the protein impact is an in-frame deletion, it must either delete more than 10% of the protein, involve P/LP missense variants in the deleted region, or affect a critical functional domain. Finally, (4) there should be no conflicting functional evidence in the literature. VUS were downgraded if (1) there is no significant splicing change (0%-10%) and (2) heterozygous informative SNPs help rule out nonsense-mediated decay. VUS retain its classification if (1) there is an incomplete splicing change (10%-40%), or (2) the variant causes an in-frame deletion without any functional impact, or (3) the variant is a missense without a splicing change, and further downgrading is not possible. Updated reports were proactively issued to providers if the classification of the VUS is changed based on the RNA-seq results.

### Analysis

VUS were characterized based on variant location, variant type (intronic, exonic missense, and exonic synonymous), and gene. Subsequent variant interpretation results were summarized for all VUS and then by variant location and type. Variants that were reclassified as P/LP or not reportable were compared with variant interpretation in ClinVar to determine whether the new classification was novel.

### Results

Of the total 7904 VUS, we identified 411 VUS that were predicted to affect splicing and underwent RNA-seq, including 166 (40.4%) located in the exon and 245 (59.6%) in the intron (Figure 1A). Among the 166 exonic VUS, 132 (79.5%) were missense variants, and 34 (20.5%) were synonymous variants. Nearly two-thirds (n = 149/245, 60.8%) of intronic VUS were within 5 bp of the intron/exon junction. The 411 VUS were found in 52 genes, most commonly in ATM (HGNC:795; n = 51), BRCA2 (HGNC:1101; n = 28), BRCA1 (HGNC:1100; n = 26), and BRIP1 (HGNC:20473; n = 23) (Figure 1B).Figure 1Summary of variants of uncertain significance (VUS) included in this analysis. A. Of the total VUS analyzed, 411 qualified for RNA sequencing, and these RNA-sequencing-analyzed VUS were found in both the intron and exon. B. Number of VUS analyzed by gene and stratified further by variant location and type.

Summary of variants of uncertain significance (VUS) included in this analysis. A. Of the total VUS analyzed, 411 qualified for RNA sequencing, and these RNA-sequencing-analyzed VUS were found in both the intron and exon. B. Number of VUS analyzed by gene and stratified further by variant location and type.

The addition of RNA-seq data to variant interpretation resolved 26.3% (108/411) of all VUS, 28 of which were upgraded to P/LP and 80 of which were downgraded to not reportable (ie, VUS-favoring benign, likely benign, and benign) (Figure 2A). The remaining 303 VUS had their variant classification unchanged based on the addition of RNA-seq data. Among the 28 VUS upgraded to P/LP, 17 (60.7%) were intronic, 9 (32.1%) were missense variants in the coding region, and 2 (7.1%) were synonymous variants in the coding region (Figure 2B). Of 80 VUS downgraded to not reportable, 64 (80%) were intronic. Whereas the remaining 16 (20%) of the downgraded VUS were synonymous variants in the coding region, and none were missense variants in the coding region (Figure 2C). When evaluating reclassification rates by gene, the highest reclassification rates were in MSH3 (HGNC:7326; 9 of 13 VUS) and TP53 (HGNC:11998; 2 of 3 VUS) (Figure 2C).Figure 2Reclassification across all variants of uncertain significance (VUS). A. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Pie chart of the VUS that were upgraded and downgraded based on variant location and type. C. Classification of VUS based on gene.

Reclassification across all variants of uncertain significance (VUS). A. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Pie chart of the VUS that were upgraded and downgraded based on variant location and type. C. Classification of VUS based on gene.

In total, 9 (6.8%) of the 132 missense variants were upgraded to P/LP because of the introduction of deleterious transcripts based on the RNA-seq data (Figure 3A). The remaining 123 missense VUS in the coding region did not have their classification downgraded or changed because the impact of the variant at the protein level remains unknown.Figure 3Splicing effects of missense variants. A. Overall findings. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing found at BRCA2 NM_000059.4:c.473C>T (p.S158L) that causes whole-exon skipping. C. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing found at MUTYH NM_001128425.2:c.32T>G (p.Leu11Arg) that causes partial-exon skipping. D. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing found at MSH3 NM_002439.5:c.909G>C (p.K303N) that causes partial-intron retention. VUS, variants of uncertain significance.

Splicing effects of missense variants. A. Overall findings. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing found at BRCA2 NM_000059.4:c.473C>T (p.S158L) that causes whole-exon skipping. C. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing found at MUTYH NM_001128425.2:c.32T>G (p.Leu11Arg) that causes partial-exon skipping. D. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing found at MSH3 NM_002439.5:c.909G>C (p.K303N) that causes partial-intron retention. VUS, variants of uncertain significance.

The outcomes of aberrant splicing patterns were further analyzed. Five of the 9 missense variants disrupted the canonical splicing sites and induced whole-exon skipping. For example, the hereditary cancer germline test detected BRCA2 NM_000059.4:c.473C>T, p.(Ser158Leu), a missense variant located 3 bp upstream of the canonical splicing acceptor site at exon 5. RNA-seq data showed that the variant caused the whole-exon skipping of exon 5 in BRCA2, which generated the following frameshift variant: BRCA2 NM_000059.4:c.426_475del, p.(Pro143Glyfs∗23) (Figure 3B).

Three of the 9 missense variants generated de novo splicing sites and induced partial exon skipping. For example, MUTYH (HGNC:7527) NM_001128425.2:c.32T>G, p.(Leu11Arg), a missense variant located 5 bp upstream of the canonical splicing donor site, disrupted the canonical splicing donor site and generated a de novo splicing donor site in exon 1. RNA-seq showed that the de novo splicing site caused frameshift of the protein by 4 bp and partial exon 1 skipping, generating a frameshift variant MUTYH NM_001128425.2:c.33_36del, p.(Trp12Cysfs∗29) (Figure 3C).

The remaining upgraded missense variant, MSH3 NM_002439.5:c.909G>C, p.(Lys303Asn), located at the last nucleotide of exon 5, disrupted the canonical splicing site, resulting in a cryptic splicing site in the downstream intron being used at the splicing donor. This new splicing donor caused partial intron 5 retention, including 77 bp that generated a frameshift variant: MSH3 NM_002439.5:c.909_910ins77, p.(Gly305Serfs∗29) (Figure 3D).

In total, 2 (5.9%) of the 34 synonymous variants were upgraded to P/LP because of the introduction of deleterious transcripts based on the RNA-seq data (Figure 4A). RNA-seq data provided evidence to downgrade 16 (47.1%) synonymous VUS. The remaining 16 synonymous VUS in the coding region did not have their classification changed.Figure 4Effects of splice-altering synonymous variants. A. Overall findings. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing as a result of ATM NM_000051.4:c.1695A>G (p.Glu565=) that results in partial exon skipping. C. Sashimi plot showing the change in splicing because of the ATM NM_000051.4:c.8010G>A (p.K2670=) that causes whole-exon skipping. VUS, variants of uncertain significance.

Effects of splice-altering synonymous variants. A. Overall findings. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing as a result of ATM NM_000051.4:c.1695A>G (p.Glu565=) that results in partial exon skipping. C. Sashimi plot showing the change in splicing because of the ATM NM_000051.4:c.8010G>A (p.K2670=) that causes whole-exon skipping. VUS, variants of uncertain significance.

The synonymous variant ATM NM_000051.4:c.1695A>G (p.Glu565=) generated a de novo splicing site within exon 12 of the ATM gene, leading to partial skipping of exon 12, resulting in a frameshift deletion, ATM NM_000051.4:c.1696_1802del, p.(Val566∗)) (Figure 4B). The other synonymous variant, ATM NM_000051.4:c.8010G>A, p.(Lys2670=), located at the last nucleotide of exon 55, disrupted the canonical splicing donor at intron 55. The disruption of the canonical splicing donor caused whole-exon skipping of exon 55, resulting in a frameshift variant, ATM NM_000051.4:c.7928_8010del, p.(Lys2643Serfs∗17) (Figure 4C).

In this study, 17 (6.9%) of the 245 intronic variants outside of the canonical splice site were upgraded to P/LP (Figure 5A). The sites of variants ranged from 3 bp to 12 bp from the intron-exon junction. Approximately a quarter (n = 64, 26.1%) were downgraded to not reportable. The remaining 164 intronic VUS did not have their classification changed.Figure 5Intronic variants outside of the canonical splice site can affect splicing. A. Overall findings. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Sashimi plot showing the change in RNA splicing as a result of the BRIP1 NM_032043.3:c.1341-3C>G variant, causing a frameshift and whole-exon skipping. C. Sashimi plot demonstrating splicing changes associated with the LZTR1 NM_006767.4:c.263+3G>C variant that results in intron retention and introduction of a premature stop codon. D. Sashimi plot visualizing the 2 deleterious splicing events observed in a patient with the BARD1 NM_000465.4:c.1569-7T>G variant. VUS, variants of uncertain significance.

Intronic variants outside of the canonical splice site can affect splicing. A. Overall findings. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Sashimi plot showing the change in RNA splicing as a result of the BRIP1 NM_032043.3:c.1341-3C>G variant, causing a frameshift and whole-exon skipping. C. Sashimi plot demonstrating splicing changes associated with the LZTR1 NM_006767.4:c.263+3G>C variant that results in intron retention and introduction of a premature stop codon. D. Sashimi plot visualizing the 2 deleterious splicing events observed in a patient with the BARD1 NM_000465.4:c.1569-7T>G variant. VUS, variants of uncertain significance.

Among the 17 upgraded VUS, 14 caused whole-exon skipping by disrupting the canonical splice site (Figure 5A). For example, whole-exon skipping was observed in exon 12 for the variant BRIP1 NM_032043.3:c.1341-3C>G, which caused the frameshift mutation BRIP1 NM_032043.3:c.1341_1473del, p.(Asn447Lysfs∗35) (Figure 5B). Two of the 14 upgraded variants disrupted the canonical splice site, leading to the utilization of a cryptic splice site in the downstream intronic regions and subsequently to partial intron retention. For example, the intronic variant LZTR1 (HGNC:6742) NM_006767.4:c.263+3G>C led to aberrant RNA splicing for a 33-bp intronic region retention and introduction of a premature stop codon, LZTR1 NM_006767.4:c.263_264ins33, (p.Lys89∗) (Figure 5C).

Interestingly, the variant BARD1 (HGNC:952) NM_000465.4:c.1569-7T>G that was detected during hereditary cancer testing was found to disrupt the canonical splicing acceptor at exon 7 and led to 2 deleterious splicing events (Figure 5D). The first deleterious splicing event, BARD1 NM_000465.4:c.1608_1677del (p.Asp536Glufs∗2), was partial exon skipping of exon 7 induced by splicing with a cryptic splicing acceptor in exon 7. The second deleterious splicing event, BARD1 NM_000465.4:c.1569_1677del (p.Asn524∗), caused whole-exon skipping of exon 7. Approximately two-thirds of the transcripts showed partial exon 7 skipping and a third of the transcripts showed whole-exon 7 skipping.

### Overall VUS findings

Of the total 7904 VUS, we identified 411 VUS that were predicted to affect splicing and underwent RNA-seq, including 166 (40.4%) located in the exon and 245 (59.6%) in the intron (Figure 1A). Among the 166 exonic VUS, 132 (79.5%) were missense variants, and 34 (20.5%) were synonymous variants. Nearly two-thirds (n = 149/245, 60.8%) of intronic VUS were within 5 bp of the intron/exon junction. The 411 VUS were found in 52 genes, most commonly in ATM (HGNC:795; n = 51), BRCA2 (HGNC:1101; n = 28), BRCA1 (HGNC:1100; n = 26), and BRIP1 (HGNC:20473; n = 23) (Figure 1B).Figure 1Summary of variants of uncertain significance (VUS) included in this analysis. A. Of the total VUS analyzed, 411 qualified for RNA sequencing, and these RNA-sequencing-analyzed VUS were found in both the intron and exon. B. Number of VUS analyzed by gene and stratified further by variant location and type.

Summary of variants of uncertain significance (VUS) included in this analysis. A. Of the total VUS analyzed, 411 qualified for RNA sequencing, and these RNA-sequencing-analyzed VUS were found in both the intron and exon. B. Number of VUS analyzed by gene and stratified further by variant location and type.

The addition of RNA-seq data to variant interpretation resolved 26.3% (108/411) of all VUS, 28 of which were upgraded to P/LP and 80 of which were downgraded to not reportable (ie, VUS-favoring benign, likely benign, and benign) (Figure 2A). The remaining 303 VUS had their variant classification unchanged based on the addition of RNA-seq data. Among the 28 VUS upgraded to P/LP, 17 (60.7%) were intronic, 9 (32.1%) were missense variants in the coding region, and 2 (7.1%) were synonymous variants in the coding region (Figure 2B). Of 80 VUS downgraded to not reportable, 64 (80%) were intronic. Whereas the remaining 16 (20%) of the downgraded VUS were synonymous variants in the coding region, and none were missense variants in the coding region (Figure 2C). When evaluating reclassification rates by gene, the highest reclassification rates were in MSH3 (HGNC:7326; 9 of 13 VUS) and TP53 (HGNC:11998; 2 of 3 VUS) (Figure 2C).Figure 2Reclassification across all variants of uncertain significance (VUS). A. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Pie chart of the VUS that were upgraded and downgraded based on variant location and type. C. Classification of VUS based on gene.

Reclassification across all variants of uncertain significance (VUS). A. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Pie chart of the VUS that were upgraded and downgraded based on variant location and type. C. Classification of VUS based on gene.

### Missense variants are capable of affecting RNA splicing

In total, 9 (6.8%) of the 132 missense variants were upgraded to P/LP because of the introduction of deleterious transcripts based on the RNA-seq data (Figure 3A). The remaining 123 missense VUS in the coding region did not have their classification downgraded or changed because the impact of the variant at the protein level remains unknown.Figure 3Splicing effects of missense variants. A. Overall findings. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing found at BRCA2 NM_000059.4:c.473C>T (p.S158L) that causes whole-exon skipping. C. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing found at MUTYH NM_001128425.2:c.32T>G (p.Leu11Arg) that causes partial-exon skipping. D. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing found at MSH3 NM_002439.5:c.909G>C (p.K303N) that causes partial-intron retention. VUS, variants of uncertain significance.

Splicing effects of missense variants. A. Overall findings. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing found at BRCA2 NM_000059.4:c.473C>T (p.S158L) that causes whole-exon skipping. C. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing found at MUTYH NM_001128425.2:c.32T>G (p.Leu11Arg) that causes partial-exon skipping. D. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing found at MSH3 NM_002439.5:c.909G>C (p.K303N) that causes partial-intron retention. VUS, variants of uncertain significance.

The outcomes of aberrant splicing patterns were further analyzed. Five of the 9 missense variants disrupted the canonical splicing sites and induced whole-exon skipping. For example, the hereditary cancer germline test detected BRCA2 NM_000059.4:c.473C>T, p.(Ser158Leu), a missense variant located 3 bp upstream of the canonical splicing acceptor site at exon 5. RNA-seq data showed that the variant caused the whole-exon skipping of exon 5 in BRCA2, which generated the following frameshift variant: BRCA2 NM_000059.4:c.426_475del, p.(Pro143Glyfs∗23) (Figure 3B).

Three of the 9 missense variants generated de novo splicing sites and induced partial exon skipping. For example, MUTYH (HGNC:7527) NM_001128425.2:c.32T>G, p.(Leu11Arg), a missense variant located 5 bp upstream of the canonical splicing donor site, disrupted the canonical splicing donor site and generated a de novo splicing donor site in exon 1. RNA-seq showed that the de novo splicing site caused frameshift of the protein by 4 bp and partial exon 1 skipping, generating a frameshift variant MUTYH NM_001128425.2:c.33_36del, p.(Trp12Cysfs∗29) (Figure 3C).

The remaining upgraded missense variant, MSH3 NM_002439.5:c.909G>C, p.(Lys303Asn), located at the last nucleotide of exon 5, disrupted the canonical splicing site, resulting in a cryptic splicing site in the downstream intron being used at the splicing donor. This new splicing donor caused partial intron 5 retention, including 77 bp that generated a frameshift variant: MSH3 NM_002439.5:c.909_910ins77, p.(Gly305Serfs∗29) (Figure 3D).

### Synonymous variants are not always silent in the roles of RNA splicing

In total, 2 (5.9%) of the 34 synonymous variants were upgraded to P/LP because of the introduction of deleterious transcripts based on the RNA-seq data (Figure 4A). RNA-seq data provided evidence to downgrade 16 (47.1%) synonymous VUS. The remaining 16 synonymous VUS in the coding region did not have their classification changed.Figure 4Effects of splice-altering synonymous variants. A. Overall findings. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing as a result of ATM NM_000051.4:c.1695A>G (p.Glu565=) that results in partial exon skipping. C. Sashimi plot showing the change in splicing because of the ATM NM_000051.4:c.8010G>A (p.K2670=) that causes whole-exon skipping. VUS, variants of uncertain significance.

Effects of splice-altering synonymous variants. A. Overall findings. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Sashimi plot demonstrating the change in splicing as a result of ATM NM_000051.4:c.1695A>G (p.Glu565=) that results in partial exon skipping. C. Sashimi plot showing the change in splicing because of the ATM NM_000051.4:c.8010G>A (p.K2670=) that causes whole-exon skipping. VUS, variants of uncertain significance.

The synonymous variant ATM NM_000051.4:c.1695A>G (p.Glu565=) generated a de novo splicing site within exon 12 of the ATM gene, leading to partial skipping of exon 12, resulting in a frameshift deletion, ATM NM_000051.4:c.1696_1802del, p.(Val566∗)) (Figure 4B). The other synonymous variant, ATM NM_000051.4:c.8010G>A, p.(Lys2670=), located at the last nucleotide of exon 55, disrupted the canonical splicing donor at intron 55. The disruption of the canonical splicing donor caused whole-exon skipping of exon 55, resulting in a frameshift variant, ATM NM_000051.4:c.7928_8010del, p.(Lys2643Serfs∗17) (Figure 4C).

### Intronic variants outside of the canonical splice site can affect splicing

In this study, 17 (6.9%) of the 245 intronic variants outside of the canonical splice site were upgraded to P/LP (Figure 5A). The sites of variants ranged from 3 bp to 12 bp from the intron-exon junction. Approximately a quarter (n = 64, 26.1%) were downgraded to not reportable. The remaining 164 intronic VUS did not have their classification changed.Figure 5Intronic variants outside of the canonical splice site can affect splicing. A. Overall findings. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Sashimi plot showing the change in RNA splicing as a result of the BRIP1 NM_032043.3:c.1341-3C>G variant, causing a frameshift and whole-exon skipping. C. Sashimi plot demonstrating splicing changes associated with the LZTR1 NM_006767.4:c.263+3G>C variant that results in intron retention and introduction of a premature stop codon. D. Sashimi plot visualizing the 2 deleterious splicing events observed in a patient with the BARD1 NM_000465.4:c.1569-7T>G variant. VUS, variants of uncertain significance.

Intronic variants outside of the canonical splice site can affect splicing. A. Overall findings. Sankey plot showing the outcomes of including RNA sequencing data into the evidence for variant interpretation and classification. B. Sashimi plot showing the change in RNA splicing as a result of the BRIP1 NM_032043.3:c.1341-3C>G variant, causing a frameshift and whole-exon skipping. C. Sashimi plot demonstrating splicing changes associated with the LZTR1 NM_006767.4:c.263+3G>C variant that results in intron retention and introduction of a premature stop codon. D. Sashimi plot visualizing the 2 deleterious splicing events observed in a patient with the BARD1 NM_000465.4:c.1569-7T>G variant. VUS, variants of uncertain significance.

Among the 17 upgraded VUS, 14 caused whole-exon skipping by disrupting the canonical splice site (Figure 5A). For example, whole-exon skipping was observed in exon 12 for the variant BRIP1 NM_032043.3:c.1341-3C>G, which caused the frameshift mutation BRIP1 NM_032043.3:c.1341_1473del, p.(Asn447Lysfs∗35) (Figure 5B). Two of the 14 upgraded variants disrupted the canonical splice site, leading to the utilization of a cryptic splice site in the downstream intronic regions and subsequently to partial intron retention. For example, the intronic variant LZTR1 (HGNC:6742) NM_006767.4:c.263+3G>C led to aberrant RNA splicing for a 33-bp intronic region retention and introduction of a premature stop codon, LZTR1 NM_006767.4:c.263_264ins33, (p.Lys89∗) (Figure 5C).

Interestingly, the variant BARD1 (HGNC:952) NM_000465.4:c.1569-7T>G that was detected during hereditary cancer testing was found to disrupt the canonical splicing acceptor at exon 7 and led to 2 deleterious splicing events (Figure 5D). The first deleterious splicing event, BARD1 NM_000465.4:c.1608_1677del (p.Asp536Glufs∗2), was partial exon skipping of exon 7 induced by splicing with a cryptic splicing acceptor in exon 7. The second deleterious splicing event, BARD1 NM_000465.4:c.1569_1677del (p.Asn524∗), caused whole-exon skipping of exon 7. Approximately two-thirds of the transcripts showed partial exon 7 skipping and a third of the transcripts showed whole-exon 7 skipping.

### Discussion

According to American College of Medical Genetics/Association for Molecular Pathology variant classification guidelines,10 rare variants located at canonical splicing sites (±2 bp from the exon-intron junction) are assigned the PVS1 criterion and should be classified as LP if there are no associated clinical cases or functional studies available in the literature. In silico splicing predictions are considered supporting evidence under criterion PP3.10 However, variants predicted to impact splicing are often classified as VUS, as these predictions alone are insufficient for a definitive clinical assertion of pathogenicity. Our study illustrates that 26.3% of the VUS were resolved with the support of functional data from RNA-seq, and 6.8% of the variant reclassifications will affect patient management as the variants were upgraded from VUS to P/LP.

The major aim of hereditary cancer testing is to provide guidance for the clinical management of patients and their family members.1,20 Although testing had traditionally been based on strict testing criteria and limited to only a few genes, the advancements of NGS have allowed for MGPTs to be more widely available. As a result, variant detection rates have increased, including VUS, because of our limited knowledge of variant effects. Although up to 25% of DNA variants in genes associated with hereditary cancer disrupt RNA splicing, most of these variants are classified as VUS because of the lack of functional RNA evidence and limited literature on clinical cases or functional studies for the variant of interest.18, 19, 20 VUS are a complex aspect of genetic testing and lead to challenges in clinical interpretation and patient counseling and care.12, 13, 14, 15,28,29

Our results demonstrate that RNA-seq provides clarity for the interpretation of VUS that affect splicing, with 26.3% of the VUS analyzed being resolved. Variants including missense variants, synonymous variants, and intronic variants caused deleterious alternative splicing events and resulted in 6.8% of the VUS being updated to P/LP based on the RNA-seq results. The data from our RNA testing suggest that variants affecting splicing are not limited to being located in the canonical splicing site, nor restricted in a certain type of variant, indicating that these variants play important roles in regulating RNA splicing. More importantly, among the variants that were upgraded from VUS to LP, 67.9% (19/28) were identified in clinically actionable genes, including ATM, AXIN2 (HGNC:904), BARD1, BRCA1, BRCA2, BRIP1, CHEK2 (HGNC:16627), MLH1 (HGNC:7127), MSH2 (HGNC:7325), PALB2 (HGNC:26144), and RAD51C (HGNC:9820). The reclassification of the VUS will have a significant impact on the clinical management of the probands and their family members because the new result could allow access to targeted therapy and/or adjustments to the clinical surveillance based on a more precise risk.30,31 Moreover, the genetic test results can be used in reproductive decisions. Our results indicated that RNA-seq is a robust assay to facilitate the interpretation of variants that play a role in RNA splicing.

Although RNA-seq data can provide insights into the functional impact of a variant on splicing, it is not always sufficient to reclassify a variant. The classification remained the same in 73.7% (303/411) of the VUS in our study; as such, additional evidence is needed to support the reclassification of VUS predicted to affect splicing. For example, missense variants with RNA-seq data that could not provide enough evidence to upgrade a VUS to P/LP were kept as VUS and could not be downgraded to not reportable. The missense variants generally are assessed based on whether the change will affect the protein function.10,32 Thus, these VUS in particular would benefit from additional functional studies to evaluate the impact on the protein to resolve these VUS.

The limitations of this study should be considered when interpreting the results. First, this study excluded VUS located in the canonical splicing site. Generally, variants detected in this region are annotated as loss-of-function variants and classified as LP (at minimum) if the allele frequency is low in the general population.10 RNA testing of these variants might provide more accurate variant interpretation based on functional data. Additionally, VUS identified for inclusion in this study were based on in silico algorithms to identify those VUS with the highest likelihood of affecting splicing. These algorithms may have missed some VUS. Continual evaluation of VUS with updated models will aid in the ongoing resolution of splicing VUS. Similarly, this study required that these genes be expressed and detected in blood cells, which could have excluded genes associated with hereditary cancer syndromes as expression may not be abundant enough to reach a detectable limit in blood samples. Finally, this study was based on RNA-seq completed only after a VUS that was predicted to affect splicing was identified. Thus, the identification of deep intronic variants that are not included in the germline genetic test was not possible in this study. Alternative approaches to testing, such as concurrent DNA and RNA analysis or genome sequencing, could identify novel variants that affect splicing and could increase the risk of cancer. Finally, as noted in previous reports,33 there is a well-known higher prevalence of VUS among minority groups and diverse populations. This disparity is likely due to historical imbalances in access to genetic testing, leading to a knowledge base that is predominantly derived from data on individuals of European ancestry.34,35 As such, although RNA-seq shows promise in resolving VUS, its effectiveness is still hampered by the lack of comprehensive data on diverse populations. The limitations outlined emphasize the importance of RNA analysis in resolving VUS that may affect splicing and highlight the need for future studies to further assess the clinical utility of RNA-seq for VUS resolution.

In summary, the data presented here reinforce the clinical utility of incorporating RNA-seq into variant interpretation as a tool to help resolve VUS predicted to affect splicing. Although RNA-seq data can provide insights into the functional impact of a variant on splicing, it is not always sufficient to reclassify a variant. As such, additional evidence is needed to support the reclassification of VUS predicted to affect splicing. Regardless, in cases in which RNA-seq data do change the classification of a VUS, the implications for clinical management are impactful for patients and their families by helping to provide a more definitive risk for hereditary cancer and opportunities for prevention and/or early detection.

### Data Availability

Data are available upon request from the corresponding author (Wenbo Xu, MD, PhD wxu@natera.com and Natera, Inc), except for primary sequencing data because the patient samples with the unique variants are impossible to guarantee anonymity for.

### Ethics Declaration

This study was granted a waiver of consent process and of the requirement for documentation of informed consent under 45 CFR 46.116(c)(d) under the local institutional review board determination (Salus institutional review board, ID# 21204-01A).

### Funding

No external funding was provided for this research.

### Conflict of Interest

Youbao Sha, J. Bryce Ortiz, Sara L. Bristow, Kate Loranger, Sheetal Parmar, Adam C. ElNaggar, and Wenbo Xu are employees of Natera, Inc, with stocks or options to own stock in the company.



# SUPPLEMENTAL FILE 1: main.pdf

# Preparing to download ...

[HHS Vulnerability Disclosure](https://www.hhs.gov/vulnerability-disclosure-policy/index.html)

# SUPPLEMENTAL FILE 2: genetics_bopp.pdf

[PDF file available at: genetics_bopp.pdf]



# SUPPLEMENTAL FILE 3: scholar_lookup

[File available at: automated_output/BRCA2/20251125_175029/pmc_fulltext/39902189_supplements/scholar_lookup]



# SUPPLEMENTAL FILE 4: genetics_ceg.pdf

[PDF file available at: genetics_ceg.pdf]

