# MAIN TEXT

## The conformational landscape of human transthyretin revealed by cryo-EM

### Abstract

Transthyretin (TTR) is a natively tetrameric thyroxine transporter found in blood and cerebrospinal fluid whose misfolding and aggregation causes transthyretin amyloidosis. A rational drug design campaign identified the small molecule tafamidis (Vyndaqel/Vyndamax) as an effective stabilizer of the native TTR fold, and this aggregation inhibitor is regulatory agency-approved for the treatment of TTR amyloidosis. Despite 50 years of structural studies on TTR and this triumph of structure-based drug design, there remains a notable dearth of structural information available to understand ligand binding allostery and amyloidogenic TTR unfolding intermediates. We used single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) to investigate the conformational landscape of this 55 kiloDalton tetramer in the absence and presence of one or two ligands, revealing inherent asymmetries in the tetrameric architecture and previously unobserved conformational states. These findings provide critical mechanistic insights into negatively cooperative ligand binding and the structural pathways responsible for TTR amyloidogenesis. This study underscores the capacity of cryo-EM to provide new insights into protein structures that have been historically considered too small to visualize and to identify pharmacological targets suppressed by the confines of the crystal lattice, opening uncharted territory in structure-based drug design.

### Introduction

Transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTR) is a life-threatening degenerative disease associated with the misfolding and aggregation of the transthyretin (TTR) protein, leading to accumulation of aggregates, including amyloid fibrils, in the heart, peripheral and autonomic nerves, brain, and gastrointestinal tract. Hereditary forms of ATTR (ATTRv), linked to mutations in one TTR allele, destabilize the resulting heterotetramers comprising mutant and WT subunits and hasten dissociation, the rate-limiting step of TTR aggregation. Additionally, the aggregation of WT TTR upon aging leads to a life-threatening cardiomyopathy that affects many more patients than ATTRv (ATTRwt), making ATTRwt the third most common amyloid disease behind Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s1,2.

TTR is a transporter of thyroid hormone (T4) and holoretinol-binding protein in blood and cerebrospinal fluid, and there is evidence that TTR may also be involved in nerve regeneration and protein homeostasis3. It was previously shown that TTR amyloid formation is initiated by dissociation of native tetrameric TTR, followed by monomer misfolding into a misassembly-prone species, although the details of this process remain the subject of debate4. The small molecule tafamidis was found to stabilize the native TTR tetramer by occupying the T4 binding pocket, thereby preventing dissociation, misfolding, and aggregation5. Tafamidis-mediated stabilization of TTR was shown to effectively inhibit the amyloidogenesis cascade and stop or slow disease progression, and in 2019 the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved tafamidis (Vyndaqel/Vyndamax) for treatment of ATTR-associated heart failure.

Despite this successful structure-based drug design campaign, there remains a notable dearth of structural insights into TTR ligand-binding allostery. Moreover, there is not very much structural information on amyloidogenic TTR unfolding intermediates. In this study, we used single-particle cryo-electron microscopy to resolve different conformations that TTR adopted in solution. The TTR protomer natively adopts a β-sandwich fold that oligomerizes as a ”dimer of dimers” to form a D2-symmetric homotetramer. Two TTR subunits form a dimer via pairing of the ”H” β-strands, which connects the hydrophobic cores of the neighboring β-sandwiches (Fig. 1A, Supplementary Fig. 1). The peripheral strands of each β-sandwich fold are ”capped” by a structured loop connecting strands D and E (Fig. 1A). A pair of dimers then form the tetramer through four contact points between the A-B and G-H loops of opposing subunits, comprising the two T4 binding sites (Fig 1A, Supplementary Fig. 1). Tafamidis binds at the two T4 sites to stabilize this weaker dimer-dimer interface (Supplementary Fig. 1), thereby inhibiting tetramer dissociation, which is rate-limiting for the misfolding and misassembly of TTR. Despite the binding pockets being symmetrically equivalent according to prior crystallographic structure determinations, the association constant of tafamidis, T4, and a host of other small molecules is substantially higher (as much as 100-fold) for the first binding event compared to the second5,6. This has led to decades of speculation and dispute regarding the mechanistic source of this negative cooperativity7. The single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) reconstructions presented in this work shed light on two paramount aspects of TTR biochemistry: the basis of negatively cooperative small molecule binding, and the propensity for amyloidogenic unfolding.

### Results

At 55 kDa, the TTR tetramer is a small target for single-particle cryo-EM analysis, given the theoretical limit of approximately 35 kDa. Initial cryo-EM imaging studies revealed a strong interaction between TTR and the air-water interface, which prevented structure determination of TTR using traditional open-hole TEM grids (Supplementary Fig. 2A). To overcome this issue, we used TEM grids modified with a monolayer of crystalline graphene, a technique that has been successful for high-resolution structure determination of other ~50 kDa proteins8. Notably, these cryo-EM studies provided an opportunity to examine the three-dimensional TTR structure free of crystal packing and enforced symmetry, and thus we did not impose any symmetry constraints to the final reconstructions (Supplementary Figs. 2-4).

Unexpectedly, and in stark contrast to prior crystallographic studies, our cryo-EM analyses revealed that unliganded TTR is an asymmetric tetramer in solution. Further, we observed distinct asymmetric conformational states of unliganded TTR, characterized by a shearing motion of the β-sheets along the axis of the weaker dimer-dimer interface bisecting the T4 sites (Fig. 1B,C). One of these asymmetric states, resolved to a global resolution of ~3.3 Å, most closely resembles previously determined crystal structures of TTR, as indicated by the H β-strand dihedral angles (Fig. 1D, Supplementary Fig. 5A), and thus will be referred to as the canonical state. We also resolved a previously unobserved conformation, characterized by an accordion-like compression of the tetramer along the axis bisecting the T4 binding pockets (hereafter referred to as the compressed state, Fig. 1B,C, Supplementary Movie 1). The β-strands accommodate this compression by undergoing a shearing rearrangement that results in an increase in the dihedral angle between opposingly directed β-strands (Fig. 1C,E).

Intriguingly, we identified a subset of the particles within the compressed state data that lacked density at periphery of the β-sandwiches. We refer to this structure as ”frayed,” since its appearance evokes frayed fabric. The fraying of the density in this state is asymmetric, with the density for the C-terminus of strand C and loops flanking strand D being particularly weaker on one side of the tetramer than the other, as evidenced by visual inspection and reflected in the B-factors (Fig. 1B and Supplementary Fig. 6). We considered the possibility that the loss of density could be arising from partial denaturation at the air-water interface or by graphene interactions, but analysis of 2D class averages and particle orientation distribution suggested otherwise (Supplementary Text 1). Thus, we attribute the weakened density to greater mobility and entropy of the structural elements in this region.

The observed disordering of strands C, D, and their flanking loops in our structures is consistent with a partially unfolded amyloidogenic state previously hypothesized to be adopted by a TTR monomer upon tetramer dissociation9. The involvement of these disordered structural elements in the unfolding and aggregation process is supported by the fact that the most common ATTR-associated mutation, V30M, positioned near the N-terminal end of strand ”B”, is located proximal to one of these disordered regions in the frayed state (Supplementary Fig. 7). This mutation of a small amino acid with a high β-strand propensity to a bulky one with lower β-strand propensity likely10 destabilizes the pairing of strands B and C in a region that we observe to already be labile in wild-type TTR. In the context of a dissociated monomer, a destabilizing V30M mutation would likely further promote unfolding, exacerbating irreversible aggregation, including amyloid formation. Another ATTR-associated mutation, L55P, is likely to abolish pairing between strands D and A to drive unfolding and aggregation through a similar mechanism (Supplementary Fig. 7). Observation of this proposed amyloidogenic intermediate in our ligand-free TTR tetramer strongly supports this mechanism of amyloidogenesis, which was initially proposed over 30 years ago11.

The asymmetric structural arrangement of the frayed TTR tetramer prompted us to further investigate the asymmetry within the canonical and compressed TTR conformations. Nearly all of the more than 200 available crystallographically-derived TTR structures were based on crystallization in the P21212 space group, with the dimer as the asymmetric unit and a crystallographic symmetry axis running through the T4 binding pockets (green ovals in Fig. 1A), giving rise to binding pockets of equivalent size and shape. In contrast to these crystal structures, the calculated volume of the binding cavities in each of our unliganded TTR tetramer structures are notably different from one another. While the binding pockets within each tetramer differ by ~6%, the compressed and frayed states each contain binding pockets that are up to 5% larger in volume than those in the canonical state (Fig. 1C, Supplementary Fig. 8, Supplementary Text 2). Together, these data confirm an inherent asymmetry of the native TTR tetramer assembly that, combined with conformational variation, gives rise to a range of structurally and chemically distinct T4 binding pockets, which may explain the previously established differences in binding affinity of ligands for the two TTR binding sites, as well as the capacity of TTR to bind diverse small molecule structures.

We sought to further investigate by cryo-EM how ligand binding to both T4 binding sites influences the TTR tetramer. For this, we examined TTR tetramers that were stabilized by covalent attachment of a stilbene substructure to one of the two Lys15 ε-amino groups within both T4 binding pockets (see Supplementary Fig. 9 for a line drawing of the (Stilbene)2-TTR conjugate and Supplementary Text 3)12. Crystallography has historically prevented visualization of asymmetry between the two different TTR binding sites, given that the crystallographic symmetry axis runs through the T4 binding pockets. This is compounded by degeneracy that arises from each binding site (Fig. 1A, Supplementary Fig. 1, showing one site formed by chain A and C, and the other by chains B and D) due to the inherent two-fold symmetry of the binding pockets. Our cryo-EM image analysis workflow enabled us to examine any asymmetry in the organization of the subunits that comprise the TTR tetramer, as well as in the positioning of the tethered stilbene substructures within the two T4 binding sites (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Figs. 10-12).

We expected that covalent tethering of the stilbene ligand within both binding pockets would stabilize a single symmetric conformation, structurally consistent with prior TTR crystallographic studies. Surprisingly, our cryo-EM data revealed that the (Stilbene)2-TTR conjugate similarly adopts the asymmetric canonical and compressed conformations as previously observed in the unliganded TTR dataset (Supplementary Fig. 5B). However, we were unable to identify the presence of the frayed state in the (Stilbene)2-TTR dataset, indicating that ligand binding in both T4 binding sites stabilizes the C and D strands of the tetramer. Notably, we were able to unambiguously distinguish the precise asymmetric pose of the stilbene ligand covalently linked to one of the two Lys15 ε-amino side chains in the smaller binding pocket (comprising subunits A and C) in the canonical state (Fig. 2A-B, Supplementary Fig. 13). We also noted that the quality of the covalently bound stilbene density worsens as the size of the binding pocket increases, indicating that the ligand is more flexible in larger binding pocket made up by the B and D subunits (Fig. 2B, Supplementary Fig. 14). This observation is supported by molecular dynamics simulations showing greater mobility of the ligand and nearby backbone in the larger T4 pocket of the canonical conformer (Supplementary Fig. 15, Supplementary Text 4). Although the pockets in the (Stilbene)2-TTR tetramers had a smaller volume than in the corresponding unliganded TTR conformers, the difference is likely due to distinct side chain positions in the presence or absence of ligand, as the inter-chain distances around the pocket are preserved whether liganded or not (Supplementary Figs. 8 and 14). These cryo-EM structures confirm that even in the presence of a covalently bound stabilizing ligand at both of the T4 sites, the TTR tetramer is an asymmetric entity that adopts different conformations, and that variability in the size of the T4 binding pockets correlates with the flexibility of the bound ligand.

One of TTR’s most prominent characteristics is the negative cooperativity with which it binds small molecule ligands. With the unliganded and (Stilbene)2-TTR conjugate structures in hand, we next aimed to shed light on the mechanism of negative cooperativity by imaging a TTR complex engineered to produce a homogeneous population of TTR tetramers disulfide-tethered to a biarylamine ligand in only one of the two T4 binding sites6. Thus we synthesized ((biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3) TTR (see Supplementary Fig. 16), hereafter referred to as single-liganded TTR (FT2 = double FLAG-tag.) Briefly, we synthesized and purified a (FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR tetramer, wherein only the single FT2-WT subunit harbors a Cys-10 residue that was quantitatively labeled with 2-((3,5-dichloro-4-(2-(2-(2-(pyridin-2-yldisulfaneyl)ethoxy)ethoxy)ethoxy)phenyl)amino)benzoate to covalently position a 2-(3,5-dichlorophenylamino)benzoic acid stabilizer in only one of the two TTR T4 binding sites. Covalent occupancy of one T4 site with a stabilizing ligand prevents subsequent scrambling of subunits by tetramer dissociation followed by subunit exchange6. Accordingly, our cryo-EM reconstructions of this sample contained ligand density exclusively present in one binding pocket (Fig. 3, Supplementary Figs. 17-21). Surprisingly, we did not observe the canonical state in the single-liganded TTR sample, instead only observing the compressed and frayed states (Fig. 3). As observed in the unliganded TTR dataset, fraying is only seen in the presence of a compressed sheet state, indicating fraying is dependent on sheet compression (see Supplementary Text 5). This relationship between disordering of certain regions and the tertiary organization of the sheets is further supported by previously published NMR studies, where the mutants V30M and L55P (Supplementary Fig. 7), located at the peripheral edge of the β-sandwich, affect the chemical environment of the rest of the β-sheet3. In this context, the region around β-sheet ”D” could be thought of as a linchpin that, once disengaged, leads to sheet compression and the observed compressed state (see Supplementary Text 5).

The previously published crystal structure of this (biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR contains ligand density in both pockets due to averaging across the crystal lattice, and TTR is in an intermediate conformation between canonical and compressed, with opposing H strand dihedral angles of 105° and 110°6. Considering the asymmetry distinguishing the two T4 binding sites observed across the seven reconstructions of TTR in this study, it is evident that the TTR pockets are inherently asymmetric and malleable. Subtle changes in the positions of the β-strands within the TTR tetramer are linked to the varied volume and chemical environments of the T4 binding sites, explaining TTR’s ability to bind a host of distinct small molecule structures with varying affinities (see Supplementary Text 6). In this context, we speculate that the higher overall symmetry of the canonical state, as quantified by the similarity of H-strand cross angles across the dimers (Supplementary Fig. 5), is responsible for its prevalence in crystallographic studies.

### The TTR tetramer is asymmetric, adopting multiple conformations with distinct binding pockets

At 55 kDa, the TTR tetramer is a small target for single-particle cryo-EM analysis, given the theoretical limit of approximately 35 kDa. Initial cryo-EM imaging studies revealed a strong interaction between TTR and the air-water interface, which prevented structure determination of TTR using traditional open-hole TEM grids (Supplementary Fig. 2A). To overcome this issue, we used TEM grids modified with a monolayer of crystalline graphene, a technique that has been successful for high-resolution structure determination of other ~50 kDa proteins8. Notably, these cryo-EM studies provided an opportunity to examine the three-dimensional TTR structure free of crystal packing and enforced symmetry, and thus we did not impose any symmetry constraints to the final reconstructions (Supplementary Figs. 2-4).

Unexpectedly, and in stark contrast to prior crystallographic studies, our cryo-EM analyses revealed that unliganded TTR is an asymmetric tetramer in solution. Further, we observed distinct asymmetric conformational states of unliganded TTR, characterized by a shearing motion of the β-sheets along the axis of the weaker dimer-dimer interface bisecting the T4 sites (Fig. 1B,C). One of these asymmetric states, resolved to a global resolution of ~3.3 Å, most closely resembles previously determined crystal structures of TTR, as indicated by the H β-strand dihedral angles (Fig. 1D, Supplementary Fig. 5A), and thus will be referred to as the canonical state. We also resolved a previously unobserved conformation, characterized by an accordion-like compression of the tetramer along the axis bisecting the T4 binding pockets (hereafter referred to as the compressed state, Fig. 1B,C, Supplementary Movie 1). The β-strands accommodate this compression by undergoing a shearing rearrangement that results in an increase in the dihedral angle between opposingly directed β-strands (Fig. 1C,E).

Intriguingly, we identified a subset of the particles within the compressed state data that lacked density at periphery of the β-sandwiches. We refer to this structure as ”frayed,” since its appearance evokes frayed fabric. The fraying of the density in this state is asymmetric, with the density for the C-terminus of strand C and loops flanking strand D being particularly weaker on one side of the tetramer than the other, as evidenced by visual inspection and reflected in the B-factors (Fig. 1B and Supplementary Fig. 6). We considered the possibility that the loss of density could be arising from partial denaturation at the air-water interface or by graphene interactions, but analysis of 2D class averages and particle orientation distribution suggested otherwise (Supplementary Text 1). Thus, we attribute the weakened density to greater mobility and entropy of the structural elements in this region.

The observed disordering of strands C, D, and their flanking loops in our structures is consistent with a partially unfolded amyloidogenic state previously hypothesized to be adopted by a TTR monomer upon tetramer dissociation9. The involvement of these disordered structural elements in the unfolding and aggregation process is supported by the fact that the most common ATTR-associated mutation, V30M, positioned near the N-terminal end of strand ”B”, is located proximal to one of these disordered regions in the frayed state (Supplementary Fig. 7). This mutation of a small amino acid with a high β-strand propensity to a bulky one with lower β-strand propensity likely10 destabilizes the pairing of strands B and C in a region that we observe to already be labile in wild-type TTR. In the context of a dissociated monomer, a destabilizing V30M mutation would likely further promote unfolding, exacerbating irreversible aggregation, including amyloid formation. Another ATTR-associated mutation, L55P, is likely to abolish pairing between strands D and A to drive unfolding and aggregation through a similar mechanism (Supplementary Fig. 7). Observation of this proposed amyloidogenic intermediate in our ligand-free TTR tetramer strongly supports this mechanism of amyloidogenesis, which was initially proposed over 30 years ago11.

The asymmetric structural arrangement of the frayed TTR tetramer prompted us to further investigate the asymmetry within the canonical and compressed TTR conformations. Nearly all of the more than 200 available crystallographically-derived TTR structures were based on crystallization in the P21212 space group, with the dimer as the asymmetric unit and a crystallographic symmetry axis running through the T4 binding pockets (green ovals in Fig. 1A), giving rise to binding pockets of equivalent size and shape. In contrast to these crystal structures, the calculated volume of the binding cavities in each of our unliganded TTR tetramer structures are notably different from one another. While the binding pockets within each tetramer differ by ~6%, the compressed and frayed states each contain binding pockets that are up to 5% larger in volume than those in the canonical state (Fig. 1C, Supplementary Fig. 8, Supplementary Text 2). Together, these data confirm an inherent asymmetry of the native TTR tetramer assembly that, combined with conformational variation, gives rise to a range of structurally and chemically distinct T4 binding pockets, which may explain the previously established differences in binding affinity of ligands for the two TTR binding sites, as well as the capacity of TTR to bind diverse small molecule structures.

### Asymmetric cryo-EM structures of TTR with ligand in both binding pockets

We sought to further investigate by cryo-EM how ligand binding to both T4 binding sites influences the TTR tetramer. For this, we examined TTR tetramers that were stabilized by covalent attachment of a stilbene substructure to one of the two Lys15 ε-amino groups within both T4 binding pockets (see Supplementary Fig. 9 for a line drawing of the (Stilbene)2-TTR conjugate and Supplementary Text 3)12. Crystallography has historically prevented visualization of asymmetry between the two different TTR binding sites, given that the crystallographic symmetry axis runs through the T4 binding pockets. This is compounded by degeneracy that arises from each binding site (Fig. 1A, Supplementary Fig. 1, showing one site formed by chain A and C, and the other by chains B and D) due to the inherent two-fold symmetry of the binding pockets. Our cryo-EM image analysis workflow enabled us to examine any asymmetry in the organization of the subunits that comprise the TTR tetramer, as well as in the positioning of the tethered stilbene substructures within the two T4 binding sites (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Figs. 10-12).

We expected that covalent tethering of the stilbene ligand within both binding pockets would stabilize a single symmetric conformation, structurally consistent with prior TTR crystallographic studies. Surprisingly, our cryo-EM data revealed that the (Stilbene)2-TTR conjugate similarly adopts the asymmetric canonical and compressed conformations as previously observed in the unliganded TTR dataset (Supplementary Fig. 5B). However, we were unable to identify the presence of the frayed state in the (Stilbene)2-TTR dataset, indicating that ligand binding in both T4 binding sites stabilizes the C and D strands of the tetramer. Notably, we were able to unambiguously distinguish the precise asymmetric pose of the stilbene ligand covalently linked to one of the two Lys15 ε-amino side chains in the smaller binding pocket (comprising subunits A and C) in the canonical state (Fig. 2A-B, Supplementary Fig. 13). We also noted that the quality of the covalently bound stilbene density worsens as the size of the binding pocket increases, indicating that the ligand is more flexible in larger binding pocket made up by the B and D subunits (Fig. 2B, Supplementary Fig. 14). This observation is supported by molecular dynamics simulations showing greater mobility of the ligand and nearby backbone in the larger T4 pocket of the canonical conformer (Supplementary Fig. 15, Supplementary Text 4). Although the pockets in the (Stilbene)2-TTR tetramers had a smaller volume than in the corresponding unliganded TTR conformers, the difference is likely due to distinct side chain positions in the presence or absence of ligand, as the inter-chain distances around the pocket are preserved whether liganded or not (Supplementary Figs. 8 and 14). These cryo-EM structures confirm that even in the presence of a covalently bound stabilizing ligand at both of the T4 sites, the TTR tetramer is an asymmetric entity that adopts different conformations, and that variability in the size of the T4 binding pockets correlates with the flexibility of the bound ligand.

### Cryo-EM structures of TTR bound to a single ligand

One of TTR’s most prominent characteristics is the negative cooperativity with which it binds small molecule ligands. With the unliganded and (Stilbene)2-TTR conjugate structures in hand, we next aimed to shed light on the mechanism of negative cooperativity by imaging a TTR complex engineered to produce a homogeneous population of TTR tetramers disulfide-tethered to a biarylamine ligand in only one of the two T4 binding sites6. Thus we synthesized ((biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3) TTR (see Supplementary Fig. 16), hereafter referred to as single-liganded TTR (FT2 = double FLAG-tag.) Briefly, we synthesized and purified a (FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR tetramer, wherein only the single FT2-WT subunit harbors a Cys-10 residue that was quantitatively labeled with 2-((3,5-dichloro-4-(2-(2-(2-(pyridin-2-yldisulfaneyl)ethoxy)ethoxy)ethoxy)phenyl)amino)benzoate to covalently position a 2-(3,5-dichlorophenylamino)benzoic acid stabilizer in only one of the two TTR T4 binding sites. Covalent occupancy of one T4 site with a stabilizing ligand prevents subsequent scrambling of subunits by tetramer dissociation followed by subunit exchange6. Accordingly, our cryo-EM reconstructions of this sample contained ligand density exclusively present in one binding pocket (Fig. 3, Supplementary Figs. 17-21). Surprisingly, we did not observe the canonical state in the single-liganded TTR sample, instead only observing the compressed and frayed states (Fig. 3). As observed in the unliganded TTR dataset, fraying is only seen in the presence of a compressed sheet state, indicating fraying is dependent on sheet compression (see Supplementary Text 5). This relationship between disordering of certain regions and the tertiary organization of the sheets is further supported by previously published NMR studies, where the mutants V30M and L55P (Supplementary Fig. 7), located at the peripheral edge of the β-sandwich, affect the chemical environment of the rest of the β-sheet3. In this context, the region around β-sheet ”D” could be thought of as a linchpin that, once disengaged, leads to sheet compression and the observed compressed state (see Supplementary Text 5).

The previously published crystal structure of this (biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR contains ligand density in both pockets due to averaging across the crystal lattice, and TTR is in an intermediate conformation between canonical and compressed, with opposing H strand dihedral angles of 105° and 110°6. Considering the asymmetry distinguishing the two T4 binding sites observed across the seven reconstructions of TTR in this study, it is evident that the TTR pockets are inherently asymmetric and malleable. Subtle changes in the positions of the β-strands within the TTR tetramer are linked to the varied volume and chemical environments of the T4 binding sites, explaining TTR’s ability to bind a host of distinct small molecule structures with varying affinities (see Supplementary Text 6). In this context, we speculate that the higher overall symmetry of the canonical state, as quantified by the similarity of H-strand cross angles across the dimers (Supplementary Fig. 5), is responsible for its prevalence in crystallographic studies.

### Discussion

Many homo-oligomeric proteins bind their ligands with negative cooperativity, a phenomenon that has been proposed to endow these proteins with the capacity to respond to a range of ligands that are present at widely varying concentrations. Accordingly, TTR is known to bind a diverse array of chemicals, a characteristic that has been proposed to enable the tetramer to function as a broadly functioning detoxification agent13. Negative cooperativity is generally understood in terms of the Koshland-Némethy-Filmer sequential binding model, in which the first ligand binding event allosterically induces asymmetry in the complex that reduces compatibility for a second binding event. While it is generally assumed, however, that unliganded homooligomers such as TTR are symmetric in nature, we show that structural asymmetry with distinct ligand binding pockets is inherent to the TTR tetramer, with or without bound ligands. Thus, the entropic penalty associated with ligand binding is likely to be different for each binding pocket, both within a single tetramer and across conformational states.

The TTR protomers comprising the ligand-bound pocket of our single-liganded TTR reconstructions are better ordered than the protomers forming the unoccupied pocket, as evidenced by B-factors in both the compressed and frayed conformations (Supplementary Fig. 21). Given that a frayed state is observed in both the single-bound TTR and unliganded TTR datasets, but not in the (Stilbene)2-TTR conjugate dataset, we reason that the second ligand binding event has a generally less negative ΔG due to a greater loss of chain entropy upon binding. Our unliganded and (biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR datasets suggest that the disordered regions associated with the frayed state can become ordered, but we expect this ordering would incur an entropic cost. As outlined in Fig. 4, we propose that the initial ligand binding event would occur in the ordered half of TTR without incurring this entropic penalty, while the second binding event must be coupled to substantial ordering, especially in the region around the ”D” β-strand. Prior thermodynamic experiments support this hypothesis, in that the entropic contribution to the binding ΔG is generally less favorable for the second ligand binding event3,14,15. The strongly negatively cooperative binding of ligands to TTR in blood is of unknown physiological benefit, but this feature is a crucial aspect of tafamidis’ role as an aggregation inhibitor to ameliorate TTR amyloidosis. Negative cooperativity allows a single equivalent of tafamidis to nearly fully occupy one of TTR’s binding sites, instead of yielding a mixture of unbound, single-bound, and double-bound complexes. This is notable, since the binding of one site is sufficient to stabilize the TTR tetramer against dissociation, the rate-limiting step of TTR aggregation6.

It is not yet possible to explain why WT TTR dissociates, misfolds, and aggregates in about 10% of the elderly, leading to cardiomyopathy and peripheral neuropathy. We can now explore whether an aging-associated change in the distribution of the canonical, compressed, and frayed states, or the population of a new TTR state, could render a sub-population of WT TTR amyloidogenic.

Our findings highlight the role of the inherent asymmetry in the quaternary structure of TTR and the asymmetric rearrangements occurring upon ligand binding to the second T4 binding site (properties either averaged or suppressed in prior crystallographic studies) to explain the basis of TTR’s negatively cooperative ligand binding. We present previously unobserved TTR tetramer conformations, including a frayed state that could be prone to aberrant proteolysis and aggregation, particularly if the population of this state increased upon aging, for example due to proteostasis network deficiencies. Our observations suggest that proteins exhibiting apparently symmetrical quaternary structures could benefit from being reexamined by single-particle cryo-EM to discern whether less-populated or asymmetric states exist natively. Given that transthyretin was used to exemplify structure-based drug design, the potential of single-particle cryo-EM studies to upend our understanding of structural biology should be considered, even for proteins that have been historically considered too small to visualize using these methods or that have been studied for decades and where fundamentally new insights were not expected.

### Materials and Methods

We prepared graphene grids using a previously established protocol16. 12 to 24 R1.2/1.3 or R0.6/1.0 UltrAuFoil holey gold grids were washed by submersion in ~100 mL of chloroform while slowly stirring on an orbital shaker for 30 minutes. This washing step was carried out in a crystallizing dish covered with tin foil, with grids placed at the bottom, on a PELCO Clamping TEM aluminum grid holder block (prod. 16830–45) without the lid on. Two more washes were carried out in the same manner, first with acetone and subsequently with isopropanol. Between washes, grids were quickly transferred by initially placing the holder lid on the submerged lower half of the holder and scooping the assembly out with a metal fork bent to form an upright scoop, and then submerging the assembly into the next organic solvent bath at an angle of ~45° to avoid bubbles forming at the bottom. Finally, the lid was removed by pulling it up by the central holes with an 8-inch stainless steel tweezers with curved pointed serrated tip. After the final isopropanol bath, grids were picked up one by one and left to dry on air on filter paper for 15 minutes. Grids were then immediately coated with monolayer graphene.

A 15x15 cm CVD graphene film on Cu was purchased from Graphenea. In order the transfer a single layer of graphene to gold-support TEM grids, the purchased film was coated with methyl methacrylate (MMA, ”MMA EL 6” from Kayaku Advanced Materials, M310006 0500L1GL) using a homemade spin coater, as described previously8. The large CVD film on Cu was cut in small squares that fit the spin coater glass slide (~1.5x1.5 cm). Before MMA coating, filter paper was placed between the bottom of the Cu-graphene stack and the spin coater glass slide to prevent MMA from seeping under and coating the Cu from the bottom. Once coated, the MMA-graphene-Cu stack was placed Cu-side up on a glass slide and plasma cleaned for 20 seconds at 25 Watts (75% Argon/25% oxygen atmosphere) using a Solarus plasma cleaner (Gatan, Inc.). To etch the Cu layer, the MMA-coated and plasma-cleaned stack was floated MMA-side up on 200 mL of freshly made 200mM ammonium persulfate in a crystallizing dish for 3 hr. For rinsing, the graphene-MMA film was carefully picked up with a glass slide and transferred to a new crystallization dish with 200 mL of MilliQ water for 1 hour. Immediately after that, the film was used to coated grids. The leftover uncoated graphene was stored in the dark and under vacuum.

Right after cleaning, the grids were submerged in water inside a grid coating trough (LADD Research Industries, Smith Grid Coating Trough 10840), on a small filter paper square that was cut to fit the metal tray of the trough. Grids were placed very closely to one another, forming as tight a square array as possible. The rinsed MMA-graphene film was then floated onto the trough’s water surface. Using a pair of glass Pasteur pipettes whose tips had been closed by melting, we aligned the MMA-graphene film and grids. By extracting water with the syringe attached to the trough and guiding the MMA-graphene film as the water level went down, we coated 12–24 grids at the same time. The coated grids were left to dry for 30 minutes, and then further dried at 65 °C for another 30 minutes. After letting the grids cool down at room temperature for 5 minutes, we proceeded to remove the MMA layer by rinsing grids in a series of organic solvents, using the same setup as for the initial grid cleaning. We used two baths of acetone for 30 minutes each, then a final isopropanol bath for 30 minutes. Grids were left to dry at room temperature on filter paper for 10 minutes, and then stored in dark under vacuum until used. Grids were used up to one month later without noticeable issues.

To make monolayer graphene able to take aqueous sample, we treated the graphene grids with UV/ozone using the UVOCS T10x10 system, as described previously8,16. To achieve consistent performance, we followed the manufacturers’ instructions and carried out a 10-minute ”warmup” run, before immediately inserting and treating grids for 4 minutes.

BL21 (DE3) competent E. coli (New England BioLabs, Ref #C2527H) were transformed with the pMMHa vector encoding the WT TTR gene. The transformed cells were selected by growing them on agar plates containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin at 37 °C. E. coli starter cultures were initiated by taking a single colony from the agar plate and culturing it in 50 mL LB media in a 250 mL shake flask containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin at 37 °C. These cultures were grown at 37 °C with shaking until bacterial growth indicated by turbidity in the media were observed. The expression cultures were prepared by inoculating 1 L shake flask containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin with a 1:20 dilution of the starter cultures. The expression cultures were grown at 37 °C until OD600 were approximately 0.5, at which point they were induced with 1mM IPTG and incubated overnight at 30 °C with shaking. These cultures were then harvested by centrifugation at 6,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatants were removed, and the pellets were stored at –80 °C until ready for subsequent purification steps.

BL21 (DE3) competent E. coli (New England BioLabs, Ref #C2527H) were transformed with the pMMHa vector encoding the C10A TTR gene. The transformed cells were selected by growing them on agar plates containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin at 37 °C. E. coli starter cultures were initiated by taking a single colony from the agar plate and culturing it in 50 mL LB media in a 250 mL shake flask containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin at 37 °C. These cultures were grown at 37 °C with shaking until bacterial growth indicated by turbidity in the media were observed. The expression cultures were prepared by inoculating 1 L shake flask containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin with a 1:20 dilution of the starter cultures. The expression cultures were grown at 37 °C until OD600 were approximately 0.5, at which point they were induced with 1mM IPTG and incubated overnight at 30 °C with shaking. These cultures were then harvested by centrifugation at 6,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatants were removed, and the pellets were stored at –80 °C until ready for subsequent purification steps.

BL21 (DE3) competent E. coli (New England BioLabs, Ref #C2527H) were transformed with the pET-29a vector encoding the N-terminal dual-FLAG-tagged WT TTR gene. The transformed cells were selected by growing them on agar plates containing 50 µg/mL kanamycin at 37 °C. E. coli starter cultures were initiated by taking a single colony from the agar plate and culturing it in 50 mL LB media in a 250 mL shake flask containing 50 µg/mL kanamycin. These cultures were grown at 37 °C with shaking until bacterial growth indicated by turbidity in the media were observed. The expression cultures were prepared by inoculating a 1 L shake flask containing 50 µg/mL kanamycin with a 1:20 dilution of the starter cultures. The expression cultures were grown at 37 °C until OD600 were approximately 0.5, at which point they were induced with 1mM IPTG and incubated overnight at 30 °C with shaking. These cultures were then harvested by centrifugation at 6,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatants were removed, and the pellets were stored at –80 °C until ready for subsequent purification steps.

The pellets were thawed and resuspended with 50 mL Tris-Buffered Saline (TBS) with an added protease inhibitor tablet (Thermo Scientific Pierce Protease Inhibitor Tablets EDTA-Free, Ref #A32965), followed by 3 cycles of probe sonication (Qsonica Q125; 3 minutes sonication / 3 minutes rest at 4 °C). The supernatants were collected with centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 30 minutes, subjected to 50% ammonium sulfate precipitation (w/v), and stirred for 45 minutes at room temperature; then, supernatant was collected via centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatants were further precipitated with 90% ammonium sulfate (w/v) and stirred for 45 minutes at 25 °C (room temperature). The solutions were then centrifuged, and the pellets were collected and dialyzed with 3,500 MWCO dialysis tubing (SnakeSkin Dialysis Tubing, Ref #68035) overnight against 25mM Tris pH 8.0 buffer in a 4 °C cold room.

The protein mixtures were filtered using a low protein binding filter (Millipore Sigma) and purified on a SourceQ15 anion exchange column (Cytiva) at a flow rate of 2 mL/min. Protein mixtures were injected at 5% Buffer A (25mM Tris pH 8.0) and eluted over a 60-minute gradient up to 100% Buffer B (25mM Tris/1.0 M NaCl) at room temperature. The eluates were then subjected to further purification step using a Superdex 75 gel filtration column. TTR proteins were eluted with 10mM sodium phosphate pH 7.6 / 100mM KCl, confirmed for purity and mass by LC-MS, aliquoted, and stored in –80 °C.

Subunit exchange between recombinant C10A TTR (40µM) and recombinant dual-FLAG-tagged WT (20 µM) was carried out by adding stocks of each TTR variant to the same buffer sample and incubating the sample for two days. Subsequently, the sample was injected into a 4.6 x 100 mm Waters Protein-Pak Hi-Res Q ion exchange column (5 µm particle size) using Buffer A (25 mM Tris pH 8.0) as mobile phase in Waters UPLC system. The sample was eluted using a linear gradient 24–39% Buffer B (25 mM Tris pH 8.0/1.0 M NaCl) with a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min, in which separation of the five peaks resulting from subunit exchange was observed. The second peak, which corresponds to (FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR, was isolated and confirmed for purity via HPLC. The concentration of (FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR was determined using NanoDrop based on the molar absorptivity (ε = 75829 M–1 cm–1). The purified heterotetramer was stored at –80 °C.

Previously purified (FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 (40µM) was reacted with a 10-fold molar excess of Biarylamine 7 for 2 hours at room temperature (25 °C) with occasional vortexing. The samples were then purified using a Microcon 3,000 MWCO centrifugal filter column (Milipore Sigma) spun at 12,000 rpm (4 °C). The identity of the conjugate eluting ((biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR, also referred to as single-bound TTR) was then confirmed using a liquid chromatography coupled to Time-of-Flight mass spectrometry (Agilent LC/MS TOF) employing an Agilent Zorbax 300SB-C8 4.6x50mm column, confirming that only the dual-flag-tagged WT TTR peak was modified by Biarylamine 7. (C10A TTR = 13860 Da, FT2-WT TTR = 15882, FT2-WT + Biarylamine 7 minus the 2-thiopyridine leaving group = 16325)

Synthesis of the covalent small molecule 7 was adapted from the synthetic route previously published6.

All starting materials and solvents were purchased commercially from Sigma-Aldrich, Acros, Alfa Aesar, Combi-blocks, and EMD Millipore and were used without further purification. Thin-layer chromatography was carried out using Merck silica plates (60-F254), using UV light for visualization to monitor reaction progress. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) was performed using a ZORBAX RRHT StableBond C18, 2.1 x 50 mm, 1.8 µm column (Agilent Infinity, mobile phase A = 0.1% Formic Acid in H2O, mobile phase B = 0.1% Formic Acid in MeCN) coupled to an Agilent G6125B single quadrupole mass spectrometer (Agilent Infinity) was used to monitor reaction progress. Flash column chromatography was carried out using a Teledyne Isco Combiflash Nextgen 300+ machine using Luknova SuperSep columns (SiO2,25 µm) with ethyl acetate and hexanes employed as eluents. 1H NMR spectra were recorded on Bruker 400 or 500 MHz spectrometer. Characterization data are reported as follows: chemical shift, multiplicity (s=singlet, d=doublet, t=triplet, q=quartet, br=broad, m=multiplet), coupling constants, number of protons.

Di-tert-butyl dicarbonate (11 mmol, 2.4 g, 1.1 eq) was added dropwise to a stirring solution of 4-amino-2,6-dichlorophenol (10 mmol, 1.96 g, 1.0 eq) in 50 mL THF. The resulting solution was refluxed for 12 hours before concentration in vacuo. The crude solid was dissolved in DMF before addition of potassium carbonate (20 mmol, 2.76 g, 2.0 eq) and tetra-n-butylammonium iodide (1 mmol, 369 mg, 0.1 eq). Benzyl bromide (1 mmol, 1.78 mL, 1.5 eq) was added dropwise to the stirring solution and stirred at room temperature for 1 hour. Upon reaction completion as discerned by TLC, the solution was diluted with NH4Cl and water and extracted with EtOAc (3 x 100 mL). The combined organics were concentrated, and in the same flask, 30% TFA in DCM was added dropwise. After stirring for 1 hour, the solution was neutralized with NaCO3 and saturated NaHCO3, extracted with EtOAc (3 x 50 mL), and concentrated. Flash column chromatography purification (SiO2, 4:1 Hexanes:EtAOc) afforded 4-Benzyloxy-3,5-dichloroaniline as a white powder (1.1 g, 41% yield)1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.58 (d, J = 7.4 Hz, 2H), 7.42 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 2H), 7.38 (d, J = 7.3 Hz, 1H), 6.66 (s, 2H), 4.97 (s, 2H), 3.56 (s, 2H) (Supplementary Fig. 23).

Compound 3 (0.5 mmol, 134 mg, 1.0 eq), tert-butyl 2-bromobenzoate (i) (0.6 mmol, 116 µL,1.2 eq), cesium carbonate (0.7 mmol, 228 mg, 1.4 eq), RuPhos Pd G3 (0.05 mmol, 41.8 mg, 0.1 eq) were dissolved in toluene under argon. After refluxing under inert atmosphere for 24 hours, the reaction was filtered through celite and concentrated in vacuo. Flash column chromatography purification (SiO2, 95:5 Hexanes:EtAOc) afforded tert-Butyl 2-((4-(benzyloxy)-3,5-dichlorophenyl)amino)benzoate as a yellow solid (96 mg, 43%).1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3) δ 9.57 (s, 1H), 7.93 (dd, J = 8.0, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.60 – 7.55 (m, 2H), 7.44 – 7.40 (m, 2H), 7.36 (ddt, J = 10.2, 4.9, 1.5 Hz, 3H), 7.24 (dd, J = 8.5, 1.1 Hz, 1H), 7.22 (s, 2H), 6.80 (ddd, J = 8.1, 7.1, 1.1 Hz, 1H), 5.03 (s, 2H), 1.61 (s, 9H) (Supplementary Fig. 24).

Compound 4 (0.2 mmol, 90 mg, 1 eq) and 10% palladium on carbon (0.017 mmol, 18 mg, 0.09 eq) and Compound 4 (0.2 mmol, 90 mg, 1 eq) were dissolved in a 1:1 MeOH:EtOAc mixture and stirred under an H2 atmosphere balloon for 5 hours. Upon observation of complete consumption of the starting material by TLC, the reaction was diluted with DCM, filtered through celite, and concentrated in vacuo. Flash column chromatography purification (SiO2, 5:1 Hexanes:EtOAc) afforded tert-butyl 2-((3,5-dichloro-4-hydroxyphenyl)amino)benzoate as a yellow solid (70 mg, 98% yield). The physical and spectral data are consistent with those reported previously6.

Thioacetic acid (5 mmol, 350 µL, 1 eq) and potassium carbonate (5 mmol, 690 mg, 1 eq) were dissolved in anhydrous DMF (10 mL) and stirred for 10 minutes. To the resulting solution was added 2-(2-(2-bromoethoxy)ethoxy)ethan-1-ol (4.7 mmol,1.065 g, 0.95 eq) dropwise before stirring at 40° C for 2 hours. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure and crude residue purified by flash column chromatography (SiO2, 1:1 hexanes:EtOAc) to give a clear yellow-clear oil (755 mg, 77% yield).1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 3.67 (dd, J = 5.4, 3.8 Hz, 2H), 3.64 – 3.51 (m, 8H), 3.04 (t, J = 6.5 Hz, 2H), 2.28 (s, 3H) (Supplementary Fig. 25).

Diisopropyl azodicarboxylate (80.8 µL, 0.4 mmol, 2 eq) and triphenylphosphine (104.8 mg, 0.4 mmol, 2 eq) were dissolved in 4 mL anhydrous THF and stirred for 30 minutes at room temperature. After 30 minutes, 5 (70 mg, 0.2 mmol, 1 eq) and iii (83.2 mg, 0.4 mmol, 2 eq), each dissolved in 0.2 mL THF, were added dropwise and stirred at room temperature for 2 hours. The reaction was concentrated in vacuo and the crude residue purified by column chromatography (SiO2, 4:1 Hex:EtOAc) to afford yellow syrup (35.4 mg, 32.6% yield).1H NMR (400 MHz, ACETONE-D6) δ 9.47 (s, 1H), 7.91 (dd, J = 8.0, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.41 (ddd, J = 8.7, 7.1, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.32 – 7.23 (m, 3H), 6.83 (ddd, J = 8.1, 7.0, 1.1 Hz, 1H), 4.15 (dd, J = 5.6, 4.1 Hz, 2H), 3.86 – 3.80 (m, 2H), 3.68 – 3.61 (m, 2H), 3.61 – 3.49 (m, 4H), 3.02 (t, J = 6.5 Hz, 2H), 2.27 (s, 3H), 1.58 (s, 9H) (Supplementary Fig. 26).

Compound 6 (22.5 mg, 0.0414 mmol, 1 eq), and 2,2’-dithiopyridine (11 mg, 1.2 eq, 0.05 mmol) were dissolved in 1 mL anhydrous THF under an argon atmosphere. To the resulting solution was added freshly prepared NaOMe in THF (110 µL, 1.2 eq, 0.05 mmol) dropwise at 0 °C. The reaction was allowed to warm to room temperature over 2 hours before diluting with EtOAc and sequential brine and water washes. The combined organic extracts were removed under reduced pressure before addition of 1 mL TFA. After stirring at room temperature for 2 hours, the solvent was removed under reduced pressure and final compound Biarylamine 7 was purified via preparative HPLC (6.2 mg, 27% yield over two steps).1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO) δ 9.49 (s, 1H), 8.44 (dd, J = 4.8, 1.5 Hz, 1H), 7.92 (dd, J = 8.0, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.87 – 7.80 (m, 2H), 7.46 (ddd, J = 8.7, 7.1, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.34 (s, 2H), 7.27 – 7.19 (m, 2H), 6.89 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 1H), 4.12 – 4.07 (m, 2H), 3.81 – 3.75 (m, 2H), 3.67 – 3.58 (m, 4H), 3.51 (dd, J = 5.8, 3.6 Hz, 2H), 3.03 (d, J = 12.1 Hz, 2H) (Supplementary Fig. 27).

Crystals of (Stilbene)2-TTR were grown analogously as previously described for TTR co-crystals with the covalent kinetic stabilizer 4-fluorophenyl 3-[(E)-2-(4-hydroxy-3,5-dimethylphenyl)ethenyl]benzoate (A93, PDB: 3HJ0).18 Data were collected at beamline 5.0.1 at the Advanced Light Source (Berkeley, CA) at a wavelength of 0.97741 Å and a temperature of 100 K. Frames were indexed and integrated using XDS19, the space group was assigned as P21212 using Pointless, and data were scaled using Scala.20 Five percent of reflections (randomly distributed) were flagged for model cross-validation using Rfree. 21 The (Stilbene)2-TTR crystal structure was solved by molecular replacement with Phaser22, using one monomer of human WT TTR as a search model. This model was generated from the co-crystal structure of tafamidis-bound WT TTR (PDB code: 3TCT23) with the ligands removed. Two subunits (one dimer) were found in the asymmetric unit. A small molecule stabilizer CIF dictionary was generated using ACEDRG24. The model was refined with iterative cycles of manual adjustment in Coot25 and refinement in Refmac5 using isotropic thermal parameters and hydrogen atoms at calculated positions26. Final adjustments were made after analysis with MolProbity and the wwPDB Validation System27. Due to the poor electron density surrounding the Lys15-stilbene linkage, the Lys15 sidechain and amide linkage could not be modeled with certainty. Data acquisition and modeling metrics are reported in Supplementary Table 1. The crystal structure was deposited to the Protein Data Bank under accession code 8U52.

Before sample freezing, to verify that the major species in the (Stilbene)2-TTR sample is conjugated at both TTR binding sites, we carried out liquid chromatography followed by mass spectrometry (LC-MS, with LC equipment Agilent 1260 and mass spectrometer Agilent 6230 ESI-TOF) on a 3X diluted aliquot taken 3 hours after starting the reaction. For this, 5 µL of sample was injected in a reverse phase column (Agilent PLRP-S 2.1 x 50 mm 100A 5 µm) held at 60 °C and eluted with a water-to-acetonitrile gradient from 95% to 50% water, and a flow of 0.5 mL/min, 95% for 2 min then 50% water for 6 min.

To probe for the existence of A2 hydrolysis products, we carried out a time series of the A2+TTR reaction (same concentrations as used for sample preparation), injecting sample every 30 minutes for 5 hours. We monitored UV absorbance at 280 and 305 nm, as well as total ion count. We also analyzed samples containing only A2 (150µM A2 in TTR buffer + 10% DMSO) and only TTR (21µM TTR in TTR buffer). The baseline was removed using the ZhangFit method from the BaselineRemoval python package28. The exponential labeling temporal curves were generated by normalizing the area under the curve dividing by the maximum, after baseline removal. See results in Supplementary Fig. 31 and Supplementary Text 4.

A 50 µL solution of 1.7 mg/mL TTR in 100 mM KCl, 10 mM Phosphate buffer pH 7.6 (1 mM EDTA) was thawed at room temperature and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 16,000 x g, then diluted to 0.85 mg/mL. To make 20 µL of sample, we added 5 µL of TTR, 5 µL of TTR buffer, and 10 µL of 0.1% w/v beta-octyl glucoside (BOG) in TTR buffer, resulting in a final concentration of 7.31µM TTR and 0.01% w/v BOG. For grid preparation, R1.2/1.3 UltrAuFoil Holey Gold grids covered with monolayer graphene were oxidized using UV/ozone immediately before use. A manual plunger in a cold room at 6 °C and 90% humidity was used for flash freezing samples: 3 µL of sample were applied onto the graphene side of the grid after it was mounted on the plunger (always at the same height), and immediately blotted for 6 seconds by holding a ~1 x 6 cm piece of Whatman #1 filter paper parallel to the grid, in full contact. Timing was kept with the help of a metronome. The blotting countdown was started after the blotted liquid spot on the filter paper stopped spreading and the grid was plunged in liquid ethane at the same time the blotting paper was pulled back, in a single motion. Four grids were prepared this way, two pairs of identical grids blotted for 4 and 6 seconds, which were later clipped right before the imaging session. Imaging was performed on one of the grids blotted for 4 seconds.

A 50 µL solution of 1.7 mg/mL TTR in 100 mM KCl, 10 mM phosphate buffer pH 7.6 and 1 mM EDTA was thawed at room temperature and spun down for 10 minutes at 16000 x g. The TTR+A2 reaction was set up by adding 1 µL of a 1.5 mM solution of A2 in DMSO to 19 µL of the TTR stock solution specified immediately above. The A2+TTR reaction was incubated for 4 hours in the dark at room temperature. To make 20 µL of sample, we added 5 µL of TTR+A2 incubation reaction, 5 µL of TTR buffer, and 10 µL of 0.1% w/v beta-octyl glucoside (BOG) in TTR buffer, resulting in final concentrations: 7.31µM TTR, 18.75µM A2, 0.01% w/v BOG, and 1.25% v/v DMSO. Grids were prepared in the same way as the unliganded TTR conjugate sample, except that sample was blotted for 6 and 8 seconds.

A frozen (FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR Tetramer sample at 0.9 mg/mL was thawed at room temperature for 10 minutes, and then used to prepare grids. Grids were prepared in the same way as the (Stilbene)2-TTR conjugate sample, except that sample was blotted for 3 seconds.

Movies of all frozen-hydrated TTR samples were collected using a Talos Arctica TEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a field emission gun operating at 200 keV, equipped with a K2 Summit direct electron detector (Gatan, Inc.). Images were acquired using the Leginon automated data collection software29. Alignments were performed as previously described to minimize coma and establish parallel illumination30,31, and stage movement was used to center image holes in a 4 x 4 array for (Stilbene)2-TTR and unliganded TTR samples (graphene-coated R1.2/1.3 UltrAuFoil grids) and 8x8 array (graphene-coated 0.6/1 UltrAuFoil grids) for all other samples. Image shift with beam tilt compensation was used to acquire images within each hole in the centered array. Movies were collected in counting mode (0.562 Å /pixel) with an exposure rate of 2.3 e-/pix/s, with 50 frames (150 ms each) over 7.5 s, totaling an exposure of 55 e-/Å 2. A nominal defocus between –1.0 µm and –1.5 µm was used. The Appion image analysis environment32 was used to carry out real-time frame alignment and estimation of the contrast transfer function (CTF) to assess quality of ongoing data acquisition.

Frames from 4,634 movies were aligned and combined applying a dose-weighting scheme using MotionCor233 from within the RELION 3.1 interface34. The aligned micrographs were imported to cryoSPARC 3.1.035 and CTF was estimated using CTFFind436, from within the cryoSPARC interface. Micrographs with estimated defocus values higher than 1.5 µm and reported CTF resolutions lower than 4 Å were discarded. Micrographs displaying no particles and torn or crumpled and stacked graphene were also discarded, resulting in 3,739 micrographs. For template-based particle picking, a density model of PDB 1TTR chains A, B, A’ and B’ (full native homotetramer) was generated using UCSF Chimera37 and low-pass filtered to 20 Å resolution in cryoSPARC. A maximum of 2000 picks was allowed per micrograph. Picks were inspected and curated using a normalized cross correlation (NCC) and local power (LP) thresholds. Based on visual inspection, using an NCC = ~0.5 provided the most accurate particle selection results, and lowering the local power threshold diminished the number of false positive picks on crumpled graphene areas. 1.95 million particle picks were extracted in 256-pixel boxes, and 2D averages were obtained using the 2D classification node in cryoSPARC, changing default settings to 120 classes, 1000 particles per class, 80 iterations and turning off ”force Max over poses/shifts,” an inner mask radius of 75 Å, and outer mask radius of 90 Å. Using a lower number of particles per class or keeping ”force Max over poses/shifts” selected resulted in a much lower number of different 2D classes with secondary structure features. We were not particularly stringent at the 2D cleanup stage, opting to maintain all classes remotely resembling TTR, which corresponded to 1.49 million particles. We then carried out a second round of 2D classification with the same parameters, which resulted in most classes being identifiable as TTR and with secondary structure features (Supplementary Fig. 2). The particles from these classes (1.3 million) were pooled and exported to RELION 3.1 using scripts from the pyem Github repository38.

In RELION 3.1, duplicates were removed and the particles re-extracted with a binning factor of 2. The rest of the workflow was carried out in RELION 3.2 (Supplementary Fig. 3). We performed a 3D classification imposing C2 symmetry, with the symmetry axis going through the TTR binding pockets, with K=6, tau=4 for 100 iterations. From the six resulting classes, four contained features clearly resembling secondary structure elements. We pooled these classes (870,899 particles) and carried out further 3D classification with C2 symmetry, K=4, tau=4, and 52 iterations. From the resulting four distinct classes, three had well-defined secondary structure elements, which we subsequently 3D refined separately. We used class 1 particles (335,266 particles) as input for 3D auto-refine without imposing symmetry and obtained a 3.5 Å resolution reconstruction. Using K-means clustering, we grouped micrographs by image shift using associated values stored in the Leginon database and assigned them to distinct optic groups. CTF refinement of per-particle, per-micrograph astigmatism, and per-optic group beam tilt using the K-means clustering of image shifts resulted in a 3.5 Å resolution reconstruction. Re-extraction of particles without binning, Bayesian polishing (model parameters s vel=1.2855, s div=4755, s acc=2.175, used for all polishing jobs in this dataset) and further CTF refinement improved resolution to 3.3 Å. Based on atomic structure modeling and comparison to previously determined TTR structures in the Protein Data Bank, we termed class 1 as ”canonical,” based on its overall similarity to the most common TTR structures determined by crystallography (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Figs. 4-5). Class 3 and 4 particles represented similarly compacted conformers of TTR relative to the canonical conformation, although Class 4 particles appeared to have better overall structural integrity, particularly at the periphery of the loops. We used class 4 particles (130,181 particles) as input for 3D auto-refine without imposing symmetry and obtained a 3.5 Å resolution reconstruction. CTF refinement of per-particle, per-micrograph astigmatism and per-optic group (see image shift clustering above) beam tilt resulted in a 3.5 Å resolution reconstruction. Re-extraction of particles without binning, Bayesian polishing and further CTF refinement improved resolution to 3.3 Å. We refer to this reconstruction as representative of a ”compressed” TTR structural state (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 4). We finally further analyzed the class 3 particles (202,700 particles) with 3D auto-refine without imposing symmetry, and obtained a 3.5 Å resolution reconstruction. CTF refinement of per-particle, per-micrograph astigmatism and per-optic group (see image shift clustering above) beam tilt resulted in a 3.5 Å resolution reconstruction. Re-extraction of particles without binning, Bayesian polishing and further CTF refinement improved resolution to 3.3 Å. While this subset of particles were similar in conformation to the compressed Class 4 reconstruction, the disordering of the peripheral loops led us to name this conformation as ”frayed” (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 4). The three resulting maps were sharpened by applying an overall B-factor being roughly ~1/2 of the sharpening B-factor suggested by RELION 3.1 post-processing node, to avoid excessive noise in the form of ”dust” in the final density. The B-factor applied to the canonical, compressed, and frayed reconstructions was –60, –55, and –55, respectively. See Supplementary Table 2 for further details.

Frames from 4,536 movies were aligned and combined applying a dose-weighting scheme using MotionCor233 from within the RELION 3.1 interface34. The aligned micrographs were imported to cryoSPARC 3.1.035 and CTF was estimated using CTFFind436, from within the cryoSPARC interface. Micrographs with estimated defocus values higher than 1.5 µm and reported CTF resolutions lower than 4 Å were discarded. Micrographs displaying no particles and torn or crumpled and stacked graphene were also discarded. For template-based particle picking, a density model of PDB 1TTR chains A, B, A’ and B’ (full native homotetramer) made generated using UCSF Chimera37 and low-pass filtered to 20 Å resolution in cryoSPARC. A maximum of 2000 picks was allowed per micrograph. Picks were inspected and curated using a normalized cross correlation (NCC) and local power (LP) thresholds. Based on visual inspection, using an NCC = ~0.5 provided the most accurate particle selection results, and lowering the local power threshold diminished the number of false positive picks on crumpled graphene areas. Picks were extracted in 256-pixel boxes, and 2D averages were obtained using the 2D classification node in cryoSPARC, changing default settings to 120 classes, 1000 particles per class, 80 iterations and turning off ”force Max over poses/shifts,” an inner mask radius of 75 Å, and outer mask radius of 90 Å. Using a lower number of particles per class or keeping ”force Max over poses/shifts” selected resulted in a much lower number of different 2D classes with secondary structure features. We were not particularly stringent at the 2D cleanup stage, opting to maintain all classes remotely resembling TTR, which contained approximately half of the particles. We then carried out a second round of 2D classification with the same parameters, which resulted in most classes being identifiable as TTR and with secondary structure features (Supplementary Fig. 10). The particles from these classes (1.03 million) were pooled and exported to RELION 3.1 using scripts from the pyem Github repository38.

Duplicate particles were removed, remaining particles were re-centered and extracted to the same box size using RELION 3.1. The rest of the workflow was carried out in RELION 3.2 (Supplementary Fig. 11). Initial 3D auto-refinement without imposing symmetry led to a 4 Å reconstruction according to a Fourier Shell Correlation (FSC) cutoff at 0.143. CTF refinement of per-particle defocus, per-micrograph astigmatism, and per-group beam tilt using K-means clustering of image shifts (see unliganded TTR image processing methods) led to a reconstruction at 3.4 Å resolution. Further CTF refinement including third-order aberrations improved resolution to 3.1 Å, and Bayesian polishing (model parameters: s_vel=0.96, s_div=10020, s_acc=5.88) improved the resolution further to 2.9 Å. While the preceding steps improved resolution, the resulting density seemed ”stretched” or ”smeared” in one direction, indicating anisotropic resolution. To solve this, we attempted several 3D-classification schemes, hoping to identify a subset of particles that might produce a more isotropic-resolution reconstruction. 3D classification with 6 classes, a tau value of 4, a circular mask of 90 Å, and no limitation in the E-step resolution resulted in two seemingly isotropic classes after 86 iterations (containing a total of 289,981 particles). Particles from these classes were combined, and 3D auto-refinement led to a 2.7 Å resolution reconstruction where a single stilbene rotamer could be identified in the pocket formed by chains A and C. We categorized this reconstruction as having a canonical conformation due to its similarity to our unliganded TTR canonical structure (Fig. 2, Supplementary Figs. 5 and 12). All other classes resembling TTR (736,525 particles) were pooled and used for 3D classification with 6 classes, tau value=4, and enforcing C2 symmetry with the symmetry axis (Z axis) going through the binding sites. From this classification we were able to isolate 2 more states via 3D auto-refinement without imposed symmetry, one of which was a lower resolution version of the canonical reconstruction (133,817 particles), while the other (105,961 particles, 3.1 Å resolution) we categorized as compressed based on its similarity to the unliganded compressed conformer (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 12). The two resulting maps were sharpened by applying an overall B-factor being roughly ~1/2 of the sharpening B-factor suggested by RELION 3.1 post-processing node, to avoid excessive noise in the form of ”dust” in the final density. The B-factor applied to the canonical and compressed reconstructions was –60 in both cases. See Supplementary Table 3 for further details.

Two datasets consisting of 6,017 and 6,088 movies were acquired using two different grids prepared in the same freezing session and processed separately using the same processing strategies as for the prior two datasets, resulting in 4,002 / 3,937 micrographs yielding 1.23 / 1.42 million particle picks, and 1.17 / 1.26 million particles after 2D cleanup (Supplementary Fig. 17). The particles were combined for 3D processing in RELION 3.1 (Supplementary Fig. 18), where duplicates were removed and particles re-extracted with a binning factor of 2. 3D classification into 6 classes was performed with tau=4 for 58 iterations imposing C2 symmetry (symmetry axis going through the binding sites). From the six resulting classes, four had discernible secondary structure elements. We refined (3D auto-refine) each of them separately, but only class 3 (233,376 particles, corresponding to the compressed state) and class 5 (432,655 particles corresponding to the frayed state) had isotropic directional resolution, and yielded ligand density in one binding site (Fig. 3, Supplementary Fig. 18).

3D auto-refinement of class 3 imposing C2 symmetry yielded a 4 Å reconstruction. CTF refinement of per-particle defocus, per-micrograph astigmatism, and per-optic group beam tilt (see image shift clustering above) led to an improved reconstruction at 3.7 Å resolution. Re-extraction without binning and further CTF refinement improved resolution to 3.6 Å (C2 imposed). Bayesian polishing improved resolution to 3.5 Å (C2 imposed). Refinement of per-particle defocus, per-micrograph astigmatism, beam tilt, and third and fourth order aberrations, as well as 3D auto-refinement without imposing symmetry yielded a reconstruction at 3.5 Å resolution. However, this reconstruction did not contain clear ligand density in either of the two binding sites. To separate different states with a ligand in each binding site, we created two spherical masks encompassing one binding site each and subtracted the signal outside of it from each of them in each particle, using the ”Particle Subtraction” node in RELION 3.1. From this process we obtained two new particle stacks in which only the signal from one of the binding sites remained. We carried out 3D classification without alignment with two classes and a tau value of 2 for 100 iterations and obtained two classes for each of them. One of those classification runs yielded a class with apparent ligand density (class 1, 168,443 particles) and one without (class 2, 64,933 particles). 3D auto-refinement without imposed symmetry of these classes after reconstitution of subtracted signal yielded a 3.4 Å reconstruction with clear ligand density in the binding site (168,443 particles from class 1, (biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR compressed state, Supplementary Table 4) and one at 3.8 Å without any density in the pocket (64,933 particles from class 2) (Fig. 3, Supplementary Figs. 18 and 19).

In contrast to class 3, class 5 displayed a small bi-lobed body of density in one of the binding pockets, which we attributed to the biarylamine moiety, even before refinement. Since per-optic group beam tilt was already calculated for class 3, they were imparted on class 5 particles before carrying out any further analysis. 3D auto-refinement did not improve the resolution or interpretability of class 5, so 3D classification was performed with 6 classes, tau=4, and 70 iterations, which yielded a class (class 6, 110,253 particles) that when refined with 3D auto-refinement imposing C2 symmetry, yielded a 4.1 Å reconstruction. 3D auto-refinement with C2 symmetry after re-extraction without binning, CTF refinement (per-particle defocus, per-micrograph astigmatism and per-optic group beam tilt) and Bayesian polishing yielded a reconstruction at 3.9 Å. Further CTF refinement (per-particle defocus, per-micrograph astigmatism, and per-optic group beam tilt as well as third and fourth-order aberrations) yielded a 4.1 Å reconstruction after 3D auto-refinement without imposing symmetry (biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR frayed state Supplementary Figs. 18 and 19, Supplementary Table 4).

The dihedral angle between H strands of monomers on opposing sides of a binding pocket is defined by the Cα atoms of residues 114A→17A→117C→114C and 114B→117B→117D→114D. The overall TTR extension lengths, as labeled in the cartoons in figures 1–3, are the averages of the distances between Cα atoms pairs from Leu58 in chains A and B and chains C and D.

The change in Cα dihedral angles, as initially presented in39, is used to describe hinge-like molecular motions. The Cα dihedral angle at a given position X is calculated from the position of the Cα of positions X+2, X+1, X and X–1. This angle is defined in the –180° to 180° space, and changes are expressed in absolute values to facilitate visualization.

All atomic coordinate modeling used to create models for cryo-EM datasets presented in this work followed a similar procedure as described below. We began with a model from human wild-type transthyretin, PDB 2QGB. Symmetry expansion was applied in pymol40 to generate a tetramer, and chains A’ and B’ were changed to C and D respectively. Non-protein atoms and alternative rotamers were removed. The initial model was docked and aligned to density in UCSF Chimera. The saved and translated copy of the starting model was docked in the density using the ”Dock in map” node in Phenix41. The resulting model was refined in real space using the ”Real-space refinement” node in Phenix, with options ”minimization global”, ”rigid body”, ”local grid search” and ”adp” turned on. Secondary structure or initial model restraints were not used. The resulting model was inspected in Coot42, where side-chain atoms without density were deleted, and ”real-space refine zone” was applied to 8–10 overlapping residue stretches throughout the whole protein. Attempts to remove Ramachandran and side-chain geometry outliers were made by real-space and manual refinement, as well as peptide bond flipping. When considered adequate by local resolution, water molecules were modeled considering their location and likely coordination, as well as their modeling in other TTR structures. For data derived from the (Stilbene)2-TTR sample, lysine 15 covalently modified with the stilbene was modeled as a non-canonical amino-acid with the three-letter code A2K. Parameters for A2K were generated using eLBOW and the Lys-stilbene amide bond was modeled in cis as suggested by the density in the highest resolution binding site (chains A and C of the canonical state density). For data derived from the (biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR sample, parameter files and models for the small molecule moiety were obtained from the Protein Data Bank, as crystal structures of this complex have already been published6. In (biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR position B10 was modeled as cysteine, while A10, C10 and D10 were modeled as alanine. This decision was based on the local density features in the compressed state, given its higher resolution.

In all models, after the initial manual refinement in coot the model was refined again using the ”Real-space refinement” node in Phenix41. This process was repeated until no changes were considered by manually inspecting the model in Coot; i.e., ”Real-space refinement” in Phenix was the last step in all modeling. Data modeling statistics produced with Phenix41 are reported in Supplementary Tables 2-4. Map-to-model Fourier correlation plots are presented in Supplementary Figs. 4, 12, and 19.

The DeepEMHancer43 software package was used to sharpen the density maps for generating figure panels depicting the TTR reconstructions. These DeepEMHancer-generated maps were not used for modeling or interpretation. UCSF ChimeraX44 was used to create the surface representations of cryo-EM densities and ribbon/licorice representations of atomic models. UCSF Chimera37 was used to generate the wire-mesh representations that include the atomic models.

Measuring pocket volume in a consistent and comparable way can be challenging, as automatic detection may produce very different results in similar structures depending on the area accessible to a solvent-like probe, methods for defining the limits of the pocket, and slight structural differences such as sidechain conformation. For these reasons, we decided to use the Fpocket functionality45 that defines pockets by the presence of a ligand, and modeled missing sidechains in our seven TTR structures using Rosetta46 (see below). To account for ambiguities in the density, we generated 10 models per cryo-EM density (70 in total), which enabled us to estimate the error associated with the measurements (Supplementary Fig. 32). To minimize noise coming from ligand placement and chemistry, and to enable ligand-based pocket volume measurement in unliganded TTR, we took the canonical (Stilbene)2-TTR conjugate structure, aligned it to each of the other six species, and grafted the atomic coordinates of the stilbene moiety in each of them. We then ran Fpocket in the newly generated artificial (Stilbene)2-TTR complexes.

To obtain reasonable estimates of pocket volume, we used Rosetta to generate full-atom models from the partial (missing side chains) models made in Coot. We followed the protocol described in47. Briefly: rotamer positions were optimized by Monte Carlo optimization of the Rosetta score function47 and density values, followed by gradient minimization of all atom positions, allowing covalent interactions to deviate lightly from their theoretical optima. These steps were carried for four iterations going from low-repulsion (”soft ball” atoms) to full-repulsion van der Waals potential, in a routine called ”FastRelax”. The necessary scripts and command-line options are provided in the supplementary materials. Ten structures were produced for each initial Coot model to account for uncertainty derived from the lack of density. It should be emphasized that, given the conservative nature of the FastRelax protocol, the resulting full atom models only differ by small backbone and side-chain motions.

TTR structures with covalent stilbene were prepared with pdb4amber within AmberTools2148, including residue protonation-state determination with REDUCE49. Structurally determined water molecules were also removed. Antechamber50 was used to calculate AM1-BCC partial-charges for the ligand-residue adduct via the SQM method. Lysine 15 with attached stilbene ligand was given N-methyl and C-acetyl caps prior to Antechamber calculations. The ff19SB51 forcefield was used for protein residues, while GAFF252 was used for the stilbene ligand. To maintain planarity of the amide linkage between the K15 residue and the stilbene ligand, the Nz was explicitly parameterized with the GAFF2 sp2 amide N atom type (”n”) instead of the N3 ff19SB atom type. An OPC53 water box was placed around the protein with at least a 15 Å buffer; then Na+ and Cl- ions were added to neutralize the system. Minimization and simulation were performed with OpenMM v7.7.054. Following an energy minimization, the simulation was equilibrated for 0.1 nanoseconds to prior to the production run of 500 nanoseconds. The simulation was run with an NPT ensemble at 310 K and 1.0 ATM with periodic boundary conditions. A Monte Carlo barostat was used with an interval of 25 steps along with a Langevin Middle integrator/thermostat with friction coefficient of 1.0/ps. A 2 fs timestep was used. The Particle Mesh Ewald method55 was used for electrostatic interactions with a nonbonded cutoff of 1.2 nm and a tolerance of 0.0005. The length of bonds involving hydrogen atoms were constrained and water molecules were kept rigid with a constraint tolerance of 0.000001. The resulting trajectory was autoimaged with CPPTRAJ56 and analyzed with MDAnalysis in Python57.

### Fabrication of graphene grids for cryo-EM

We prepared graphene grids using a previously established protocol16. 12 to 24 R1.2/1.3 or R0.6/1.0 UltrAuFoil holey gold grids were washed by submersion in ~100 mL of chloroform while slowly stirring on an orbital shaker for 30 minutes. This washing step was carried out in a crystallizing dish covered with tin foil, with grids placed at the bottom, on a PELCO Clamping TEM aluminum grid holder block (prod. 16830–45) without the lid on. Two more washes were carried out in the same manner, first with acetone and subsequently with isopropanol. Between washes, grids were quickly transferred by initially placing the holder lid on the submerged lower half of the holder and scooping the assembly out with a metal fork bent to form an upright scoop, and then submerging the assembly into the next organic solvent bath at an angle of ~45° to avoid bubbles forming at the bottom. Finally, the lid was removed by pulling it up by the central holes with an 8-inch stainless steel tweezers with curved pointed serrated tip. After the final isopropanol bath, grids were picked up one by one and left to dry on air on filter paper for 15 minutes. Grids were then immediately coated with monolayer graphene.

A 15x15 cm CVD graphene film on Cu was purchased from Graphenea. In order the transfer a single layer of graphene to gold-support TEM grids, the purchased film was coated with methyl methacrylate (MMA, ”MMA EL 6” from Kayaku Advanced Materials, M310006 0500L1GL) using a homemade spin coater, as described previously8. The large CVD film on Cu was cut in small squares that fit the spin coater glass slide (~1.5x1.5 cm). Before MMA coating, filter paper was placed between the bottom of the Cu-graphene stack and the spin coater glass slide to prevent MMA from seeping under and coating the Cu from the bottom. Once coated, the MMA-graphene-Cu stack was placed Cu-side up on a glass slide and plasma cleaned for 20 seconds at 25 Watts (75% Argon/25% oxygen atmosphere) using a Solarus plasma cleaner (Gatan, Inc.). To etch the Cu layer, the MMA-coated and plasma-cleaned stack was floated MMA-side up on 200 mL of freshly made 200mM ammonium persulfate in a crystallizing dish for 3 hr. For rinsing, the graphene-MMA film was carefully picked up with a glass slide and transferred to a new crystallization dish with 200 mL of MilliQ water for 1 hour. Immediately after that, the film was used to coated grids. The leftover uncoated graphene was stored in the dark and under vacuum.

Right after cleaning, the grids were submerged in water inside a grid coating trough (LADD Research Industries, Smith Grid Coating Trough 10840), on a small filter paper square that was cut to fit the metal tray of the trough. Grids were placed very closely to one another, forming as tight a square array as possible. The rinsed MMA-graphene film was then floated onto the trough’s water surface. Using a pair of glass Pasteur pipettes whose tips had been closed by melting, we aligned the MMA-graphene film and grids. By extracting water with the syringe attached to the trough and guiding the MMA-graphene film as the water level went down, we coated 12–24 grids at the same time. The coated grids were left to dry for 30 minutes, and then further dried at 65 °C for another 30 minutes. After letting the grids cool down at room temperature for 5 minutes, we proceeded to remove the MMA layer by rinsing grids in a series of organic solvents, using the same setup as for the initial grid cleaning. We used two baths of acetone for 30 minutes each, then a final isopropanol bath for 30 minutes. Grids were left to dry at room temperature on filter paper for 10 minutes, and then stored in dark under vacuum until used. Grids were used up to one month later without noticeable issues.

To make monolayer graphene able to take aqueous sample, we treated the graphene grids with UV/ozone using the UVOCS T10x10 system, as described previously8,16. To achieve consistent performance, we followed the manufacturers’ instructions and carried out a 10-minute ”warmup” run, before immediately inserting and treating grids for 4 minutes.

### Batch preparation of gold-substrate grids for coating with graphene

We prepared graphene grids using a previously established protocol16. 12 to 24 R1.2/1.3 or R0.6/1.0 UltrAuFoil holey gold grids were washed by submersion in ~100 mL of chloroform while slowly stirring on an orbital shaker for 30 minutes. This washing step was carried out in a crystallizing dish covered with tin foil, with grids placed at the bottom, on a PELCO Clamping TEM aluminum grid holder block (prod. 16830–45) without the lid on. Two more washes were carried out in the same manner, first with acetone and subsequently with isopropanol. Between washes, grids were quickly transferred by initially placing the holder lid on the submerged lower half of the holder and scooping the assembly out with a metal fork bent to form an upright scoop, and then submerging the assembly into the next organic solvent bath at an angle of ~45° to avoid bubbles forming at the bottom. Finally, the lid was removed by pulling it up by the central holes with an 8-inch stainless steel tweezers with curved pointed serrated tip. After the final isopropanol bath, grids were picked up one by one and left to dry on air on filter paper for 15 minutes. Grids were then immediately coated with monolayer graphene.

### Preparation of ~1.5 x 1.5 cm graphene film for coating of gold-substrate grids

A 15x15 cm CVD graphene film on Cu was purchased from Graphenea. In order the transfer a single layer of graphene to gold-support TEM grids, the purchased film was coated with methyl methacrylate (MMA, ”MMA EL 6” from Kayaku Advanced Materials, M310006 0500L1GL) using a homemade spin coater, as described previously8. The large CVD film on Cu was cut in small squares that fit the spin coater glass slide (~1.5x1.5 cm). Before MMA coating, filter paper was placed between the bottom of the Cu-graphene stack and the spin coater glass slide to prevent MMA from seeping under and coating the Cu from the bottom. Once coated, the MMA-graphene-Cu stack was placed Cu-side up on a glass slide and plasma cleaned for 20 seconds at 25 Watts (75% Argon/25% oxygen atmosphere) using a Solarus plasma cleaner (Gatan, Inc.). To etch the Cu layer, the MMA-coated and plasma-cleaned stack was floated MMA-side up on 200 mL of freshly made 200mM ammonium persulfate in a crystallizing dish for 3 hr. For rinsing, the graphene-MMA film was carefully picked up with a glass slide and transferred to a new crystallization dish with 200 mL of MilliQ water for 1 hour. Immediately after that, the film was used to coated grids. The leftover uncoated graphene was stored in the dark and under vacuum.

### Batch coating of gold-substrate grids with monolayer graphene

Right after cleaning, the grids were submerged in water inside a grid coating trough (LADD Research Industries, Smith Grid Coating Trough 10840), on a small filter paper square that was cut to fit the metal tray of the trough. Grids were placed very closely to one another, forming as tight a square array as possible. The rinsed MMA-graphene film was then floated onto the trough’s water surface. Using a pair of glass Pasteur pipettes whose tips had been closed by melting, we aligned the MMA-graphene film and grids. By extracting water with the syringe attached to the trough and guiding the MMA-graphene film as the water level went down, we coated 12–24 grids at the same time. The coated grids were left to dry for 30 minutes, and then further dried at 65 °C for another 30 minutes. After letting the grids cool down at room temperature for 5 minutes, we proceeded to remove the MMA layer by rinsing grids in a series of organic solvents, using the same setup as for the initial grid cleaning. We used two baths of acetone for 30 minutes each, then a final isopropanol bath for 30 minutes. Grids were left to dry at room temperature on filter paper for 10 minutes, and then stored in dark under vacuum until used. Grids were used up to one month later without noticeable issues.

### UV-ozone treatment of monolayer graphene grids

To make monolayer graphene able to take aqueous sample, we treated the graphene grids with UV/ozone using the UVOCS T10x10 system, as described previously8,16. To achieve consistent performance, we followed the manufacturers’ instructions and carried out a 10-minute ”warmup” run, before immediately inserting and treating grids for 4 minutes.

### Expression and purification of WT, C10A, and FT2-WTTetrameric TTR

BL21 (DE3) competent E. coli (New England BioLabs, Ref #C2527H) were transformed with the pMMHa vector encoding the WT TTR gene. The transformed cells were selected by growing them on agar plates containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin at 37 °C. E. coli starter cultures were initiated by taking a single colony from the agar plate and culturing it in 50 mL LB media in a 250 mL shake flask containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin at 37 °C. These cultures were grown at 37 °C with shaking until bacterial growth indicated by turbidity in the media were observed. The expression cultures were prepared by inoculating 1 L shake flask containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin with a 1:20 dilution of the starter cultures. The expression cultures were grown at 37 °C until OD600 were approximately 0.5, at which point they were induced with 1mM IPTG and incubated overnight at 30 °C with shaking. These cultures were then harvested by centrifugation at 6,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatants were removed, and the pellets were stored at –80 °C until ready for subsequent purification steps.

BL21 (DE3) competent E. coli (New England BioLabs, Ref #C2527H) were transformed with the pMMHa vector encoding the C10A TTR gene. The transformed cells were selected by growing them on agar plates containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin at 37 °C. E. coli starter cultures were initiated by taking a single colony from the agar plate and culturing it in 50 mL LB media in a 250 mL shake flask containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin at 37 °C. These cultures were grown at 37 °C with shaking until bacterial growth indicated by turbidity in the media were observed. The expression cultures were prepared by inoculating 1 L shake flask containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin with a 1:20 dilution of the starter cultures. The expression cultures were grown at 37 °C until OD600 were approximately 0.5, at which point they were induced with 1mM IPTG and incubated overnight at 30 °C with shaking. These cultures were then harvested by centrifugation at 6,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatants were removed, and the pellets were stored at –80 °C until ready for subsequent purification steps.

BL21 (DE3) competent E. coli (New England BioLabs, Ref #C2527H) were transformed with the pET-29a vector encoding the N-terminal dual-FLAG-tagged WT TTR gene. The transformed cells were selected by growing them on agar plates containing 50 µg/mL kanamycin at 37 °C. E. coli starter cultures were initiated by taking a single colony from the agar plate and culturing it in 50 mL LB media in a 250 mL shake flask containing 50 µg/mL kanamycin. These cultures were grown at 37 °C with shaking until bacterial growth indicated by turbidity in the media were observed. The expression cultures were prepared by inoculating a 1 L shake flask containing 50 µg/mL kanamycin with a 1:20 dilution of the starter cultures. The expression cultures were grown at 37 °C until OD600 were approximately 0.5, at which point they were induced with 1mM IPTG and incubated overnight at 30 °C with shaking. These cultures were then harvested by centrifugation at 6,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatants were removed, and the pellets were stored at –80 °C until ready for subsequent purification steps.

The pellets were thawed and resuspended with 50 mL Tris-Buffered Saline (TBS) with an added protease inhibitor tablet (Thermo Scientific Pierce Protease Inhibitor Tablets EDTA-Free, Ref #A32965), followed by 3 cycles of probe sonication (Qsonica Q125; 3 minutes sonication / 3 minutes rest at 4 °C). The supernatants were collected with centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 30 minutes, subjected to 50% ammonium sulfate precipitation (w/v), and stirred for 45 minutes at room temperature; then, supernatant was collected via centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatants were further precipitated with 90% ammonium sulfate (w/v) and stirred for 45 minutes at 25 °C (room temperature). The solutions were then centrifuged, and the pellets were collected and dialyzed with 3,500 MWCO dialysis tubing (SnakeSkin Dialysis Tubing, Ref #68035) overnight against 25mM Tris pH 8.0 buffer in a 4 °C cold room.

The protein mixtures were filtered using a low protein binding filter (Millipore Sigma) and purified on a SourceQ15 anion exchange column (Cytiva) at a flow rate of 2 mL/min. Protein mixtures were injected at 5% Buffer A (25mM Tris pH 8.0) and eluted over a 60-minute gradient up to 100% Buffer B (25mM Tris/1.0 M NaCl) at room temperature. The eluates were then subjected to further purification step using a Superdex 75 gel filtration column. TTR proteins were eluted with 10mM sodium phosphate pH 7.6 / 100mM KCl, confirmed for purity and mass by LC-MS, aliquoted, and stored in –80 °C.

### Expression of WT tetrameric TTR

BL21 (DE3) competent E. coli (New England BioLabs, Ref #C2527H) were transformed with the pMMHa vector encoding the WT TTR gene. The transformed cells were selected by growing them on agar plates containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin at 37 °C. E. coli starter cultures were initiated by taking a single colony from the agar plate and culturing it in 50 mL LB media in a 250 mL shake flask containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin at 37 °C. These cultures were grown at 37 °C with shaking until bacterial growth indicated by turbidity in the media were observed. The expression cultures were prepared by inoculating 1 L shake flask containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin with a 1:20 dilution of the starter cultures. The expression cultures were grown at 37 °C until OD600 were approximately 0.5, at which point they were induced with 1mM IPTG and incubated overnight at 30 °C with shaking. These cultures were then harvested by centrifugation at 6,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatants were removed, and the pellets were stored at –80 °C until ready for subsequent purification steps.

### Expression of C10A tetrameric TTR

BL21 (DE3) competent E. coli (New England BioLabs, Ref #C2527H) were transformed with the pMMHa vector encoding the C10A TTR gene. The transformed cells were selected by growing them on agar plates containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin at 37 °C. E. coli starter cultures were initiated by taking a single colony from the agar plate and culturing it in 50 mL LB media in a 250 mL shake flask containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin at 37 °C. These cultures were grown at 37 °C with shaking until bacterial growth indicated by turbidity in the media were observed. The expression cultures were prepared by inoculating 1 L shake flask containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin with a 1:20 dilution of the starter cultures. The expression cultures were grown at 37 °C until OD600 were approximately 0.5, at which point they were induced with 1mM IPTG and incubated overnight at 30 °C with shaking. These cultures were then harvested by centrifugation at 6,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatants were removed, and the pellets were stored at –80 °C until ready for subsequent purification steps.

### Expression of FT2-WT tetrameric TTR

BL21 (DE3) competent E. coli (New England BioLabs, Ref #C2527H) were transformed with the pET-29a vector encoding the N-terminal dual-FLAG-tagged WT TTR gene. The transformed cells were selected by growing them on agar plates containing 50 µg/mL kanamycin at 37 °C. E. coli starter cultures were initiated by taking a single colony from the agar plate and culturing it in 50 mL LB media in a 250 mL shake flask containing 50 µg/mL kanamycin. These cultures were grown at 37 °C with shaking until bacterial growth indicated by turbidity in the media were observed. The expression cultures were prepared by inoculating a 1 L shake flask containing 50 µg/mL kanamycin with a 1:20 dilution of the starter cultures. The expression cultures were grown at 37 °C until OD600 were approximately 0.5, at which point they were induced with 1mM IPTG and incubated overnight at 30 °C with shaking. These cultures were then harvested by centrifugation at 6,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatants were removed, and the pellets were stored at –80 °C until ready for subsequent purification steps.

### Purification of tetrameric TTR

The pellets were thawed and resuspended with 50 mL Tris-Buffered Saline (TBS) with an added protease inhibitor tablet (Thermo Scientific Pierce Protease Inhibitor Tablets EDTA-Free, Ref #A32965), followed by 3 cycles of probe sonication (Qsonica Q125; 3 minutes sonication / 3 minutes rest at 4 °C). The supernatants were collected with centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 30 minutes, subjected to 50% ammonium sulfate precipitation (w/v), and stirred for 45 minutes at room temperature; then, supernatant was collected via centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatants were further precipitated with 90% ammonium sulfate (w/v) and stirred for 45 minutes at 25 °C (room temperature). The solutions were then centrifuged, and the pellets were collected and dialyzed with 3,500 MWCO dialysis tubing (SnakeSkin Dialysis Tubing, Ref #68035) overnight against 25mM Tris pH 8.0 buffer in a 4 °C cold room.

The protein mixtures were filtered using a low protein binding filter (Millipore Sigma) and purified on a SourceQ15 anion exchange column (Cytiva) at a flow rate of 2 mL/min. Protein mixtures were injected at 5% Buffer A (25mM Tris pH 8.0) and eluted over a 60-minute gradient up to 100% Buffer B (25mM Tris/1.0 M NaCl) at room temperature. The eluates were then subjected to further purification step using a Superdex 75 gel filtration column. TTR proteins were eluted with 10mM sodium phosphate pH 7.6 / 100mM KCl, confirmed for purity and mass by LC-MS, aliquoted, and stored in –80 °C.

### Subunit exchange to generate (FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR tetramer

Subunit exchange between recombinant C10A TTR (40µM) and recombinant dual-FLAG-tagged WT (20 µM) was carried out by adding stocks of each TTR variant to the same buffer sample and incubating the sample for two days. Subsequently, the sample was injected into a 4.6 x 100 mm Waters Protein-Pak Hi-Res Q ion exchange column (5 µm particle size) using Buffer A (25 mM Tris pH 8.0) as mobile phase in Waters UPLC system. The sample was eluted using a linear gradient 24–39% Buffer B (25 mM Tris pH 8.0/1.0 M NaCl) with a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min, in which separation of the five peaks resulting from subunit exchange was observed. The second peak, which corresponds to (FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR, was isolated and confirmed for purity via HPLC. The concentration of (FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR was determined using NanoDrop based on the molar absorptivity (ε = 75829 M–1 cm–1). The purified heterotetramer was stored at –80 °C.

### Modification of (FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR tetramer with Biarylamine 7

Previously purified (FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 (40µM) was reacted with a 10-fold molar excess of Biarylamine 7 for 2 hours at room temperature (25 °C) with occasional vortexing. The samples were then purified using a Microcon 3,000 MWCO centrifugal filter column (Milipore Sigma) spun at 12,000 rpm (4 °C). The identity of the conjugate eluting ((biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR, also referred to as single-bound TTR) was then confirmed using a liquid chromatography coupled to Time-of-Flight mass spectrometry (Agilent LC/MS TOF) employing an Agilent Zorbax 300SB-C8 4.6x50mm column, confirming that only the dual-flag-tagged WT TTR peak was modified by Biarylamine 7. (C10A TTR = 13860 Da, FT2-WT TTR = 15882, FT2-WT + Biarylamine 7 minus the 2-thiopyridine leaving group = 16325)

### Synthesis of small molecule covalent modifier 2-((3,5-dichloro-4-(2-(2-(2-(pyridin-2-yldisulfaneyl)ethoxy)ethoxy)ethoxy)phenyl)amino) benzoate ”Biarylamine 7”

Synthesis of the covalent small molecule 7 was adapted from the synthetic route previously published6.

All starting materials and solvents were purchased commercially from Sigma-Aldrich, Acros, Alfa Aesar, Combi-blocks, and EMD Millipore and were used without further purification. Thin-layer chromatography was carried out using Merck silica plates (60-F254), using UV light for visualization to monitor reaction progress. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) was performed using a ZORBAX RRHT StableBond C18, 2.1 x 50 mm, 1.8 µm column (Agilent Infinity, mobile phase A = 0.1% Formic Acid in H2O, mobile phase B = 0.1% Formic Acid in MeCN) coupled to an Agilent G6125B single quadrupole mass spectrometer (Agilent Infinity) was used to monitor reaction progress. Flash column chromatography was carried out using a Teledyne Isco Combiflash Nextgen 300+ machine using Luknova SuperSep columns (SiO2,25 µm) with ethyl acetate and hexanes employed as eluents. 1H NMR spectra were recorded on Bruker 400 or 500 MHz spectrometer. Characterization data are reported as follows: chemical shift, multiplicity (s=singlet, d=doublet, t=triplet, q=quartet, br=broad, m=multiplet), coupling constants, number of protons.

Di-tert-butyl dicarbonate (11 mmol, 2.4 g, 1.1 eq) was added dropwise to a stirring solution of 4-amino-2,6-dichlorophenol (10 mmol, 1.96 g, 1.0 eq) in 50 mL THF. The resulting solution was refluxed for 12 hours before concentration in vacuo. The crude solid was dissolved in DMF before addition of potassium carbonate (20 mmol, 2.76 g, 2.0 eq) and tetra-n-butylammonium iodide (1 mmol, 369 mg, 0.1 eq). Benzyl bromide (1 mmol, 1.78 mL, 1.5 eq) was added dropwise to the stirring solution and stirred at room temperature for 1 hour. Upon reaction completion as discerned by TLC, the solution was diluted with NH4Cl and water and extracted with EtOAc (3 x 100 mL). The combined organics were concentrated, and in the same flask, 30% TFA in DCM was added dropwise. After stirring for 1 hour, the solution was neutralized with NaCO3 and saturated NaHCO3, extracted with EtOAc (3 x 50 mL), and concentrated. Flash column chromatography purification (SiO2, 4:1 Hexanes:EtAOc) afforded 4-Benzyloxy-3,5-dichloroaniline as a white powder (1.1 g, 41% yield)1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.58 (d, J = 7.4 Hz, 2H), 7.42 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 2H), 7.38 (d, J = 7.3 Hz, 1H), 6.66 (s, 2H), 4.97 (s, 2H), 3.56 (s, 2H) (Supplementary Fig. 23).

Compound 3 (0.5 mmol, 134 mg, 1.0 eq), tert-butyl 2-bromobenzoate (i) (0.6 mmol, 116 µL,1.2 eq), cesium carbonate (0.7 mmol, 228 mg, 1.4 eq), RuPhos Pd G3 (0.05 mmol, 41.8 mg, 0.1 eq) were dissolved in toluene under argon. After refluxing under inert atmosphere for 24 hours, the reaction was filtered through celite and concentrated in vacuo. Flash column chromatography purification (SiO2, 95:5 Hexanes:EtAOc) afforded tert-Butyl 2-((4-(benzyloxy)-3,5-dichlorophenyl)amino)benzoate as a yellow solid (96 mg, 43%).1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3) δ 9.57 (s, 1H), 7.93 (dd, J = 8.0, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.60 – 7.55 (m, 2H), 7.44 – 7.40 (m, 2H), 7.36 (ddt, J = 10.2, 4.9, 1.5 Hz, 3H), 7.24 (dd, J = 8.5, 1.1 Hz, 1H), 7.22 (s, 2H), 6.80 (ddd, J = 8.1, 7.1, 1.1 Hz, 1H), 5.03 (s, 2H), 1.61 (s, 9H) (Supplementary Fig. 24).

Compound 4 (0.2 mmol, 90 mg, 1 eq) and 10% palladium on carbon (0.017 mmol, 18 mg, 0.09 eq) and Compound 4 (0.2 mmol, 90 mg, 1 eq) were dissolved in a 1:1 MeOH:EtOAc mixture and stirred under an H2 atmosphere balloon for 5 hours. Upon observation of complete consumption of the starting material by TLC, the reaction was diluted with DCM, filtered through celite, and concentrated in vacuo. Flash column chromatography purification (SiO2, 5:1 Hexanes:EtOAc) afforded tert-butyl 2-((3,5-dichloro-4-hydroxyphenyl)amino)benzoate as a yellow solid (70 mg, 98% yield). The physical and spectral data are consistent with those reported previously6.

Thioacetic acid (5 mmol, 350 µL, 1 eq) and potassium carbonate (5 mmol, 690 mg, 1 eq) were dissolved in anhydrous DMF (10 mL) and stirred for 10 minutes. To the resulting solution was added 2-(2-(2-bromoethoxy)ethoxy)ethan-1-ol (4.7 mmol,1.065 g, 0.95 eq) dropwise before stirring at 40° C for 2 hours. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure and crude residue purified by flash column chromatography (SiO2, 1:1 hexanes:EtOAc) to give a clear yellow-clear oil (755 mg, 77% yield).1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 3.67 (dd, J = 5.4, 3.8 Hz, 2H), 3.64 – 3.51 (m, 8H), 3.04 (t, J = 6.5 Hz, 2H), 2.28 (s, 3H) (Supplementary Fig. 25).

Diisopropyl azodicarboxylate (80.8 µL, 0.4 mmol, 2 eq) and triphenylphosphine (104.8 mg, 0.4 mmol, 2 eq) were dissolved in 4 mL anhydrous THF and stirred for 30 minutes at room temperature. After 30 minutes, 5 (70 mg, 0.2 mmol, 1 eq) and iii (83.2 mg, 0.4 mmol, 2 eq), each dissolved in 0.2 mL THF, were added dropwise and stirred at room temperature for 2 hours. The reaction was concentrated in vacuo and the crude residue purified by column chromatography (SiO2, 4:1 Hex:EtOAc) to afford yellow syrup (35.4 mg, 32.6% yield).1H NMR (400 MHz, ACETONE-D6) δ 9.47 (s, 1H), 7.91 (dd, J = 8.0, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.41 (ddd, J = 8.7, 7.1, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.32 – 7.23 (m, 3H), 6.83 (ddd, J = 8.1, 7.0, 1.1 Hz, 1H), 4.15 (dd, J = 5.6, 4.1 Hz, 2H), 3.86 – 3.80 (m, 2H), 3.68 – 3.61 (m, 2H), 3.61 – 3.49 (m, 4H), 3.02 (t, J = 6.5 Hz, 2H), 2.27 (s, 3H), 1.58 (s, 9H) (Supplementary Fig. 26).

Compound 6 (22.5 mg, 0.0414 mmol, 1 eq), and 2,2’-dithiopyridine (11 mg, 1.2 eq, 0.05 mmol) were dissolved in 1 mL anhydrous THF under an argon atmosphere. To the resulting solution was added freshly prepared NaOMe in THF (110 µL, 1.2 eq, 0.05 mmol) dropwise at 0 °C. The reaction was allowed to warm to room temperature over 2 hours before diluting with EtOAc and sequential brine and water washes. The combined organic extracts were removed under reduced pressure before addition of 1 mL TFA. After stirring at room temperature for 2 hours, the solvent was removed under reduced pressure and final compound Biarylamine 7 was purified via preparative HPLC (6.2 mg, 27% yield over two steps).1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO) δ 9.49 (s, 1H), 8.44 (dd, J = 4.8, 1.5 Hz, 1H), 7.92 (dd, J = 8.0, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.87 – 7.80 (m, 2H), 7.46 (ddd, J = 8.7, 7.1, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.34 (s, 2H), 7.27 – 7.19 (m, 2H), 6.89 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 1H), 4.12 – 4.07 (m, 2H), 3.81 – 3.75 (m, 2H), 3.67 – 3.58 (m, 4H), 3.51 (dd, J = 5.8, 3.6 Hz, 2H), 3.03 (d, J = 12.1 Hz, 2H) (Supplementary Fig. 27).

### General synthetic procedures

All starting materials and solvents were purchased commercially from Sigma-Aldrich, Acros, Alfa Aesar, Combi-blocks, and EMD Millipore and were used without further purification. Thin-layer chromatography was carried out using Merck silica plates (60-F254), using UV light for visualization to monitor reaction progress. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) was performed using a ZORBAX RRHT StableBond C18, 2.1 x 50 mm, 1.8 µm column (Agilent Infinity, mobile phase A = 0.1% Formic Acid in H2O, mobile phase B = 0.1% Formic Acid in MeCN) coupled to an Agilent G6125B single quadrupole mass spectrometer (Agilent Infinity) was used to monitor reaction progress. Flash column chromatography was carried out using a Teledyne Isco Combiflash Nextgen 300+ machine using Luknova SuperSep columns (SiO2,25 µm) with ethyl acetate and hexanes employed as eluents. 1H NMR spectra were recorded on Bruker 400 or 500 MHz spectrometer. Characterization data are reported as follows: chemical shift, multiplicity (s=singlet, d=doublet, t=triplet, q=quartet, br=broad, m=multiplet), coupling constants, number of protons.

### 4-Benzyloxy-3,5-dichloroaniline (Compound 3 in Supplementary Fig. 22)

Di-tert-butyl dicarbonate (11 mmol, 2.4 g, 1.1 eq) was added dropwise to a stirring solution of 4-amino-2,6-dichlorophenol (10 mmol, 1.96 g, 1.0 eq) in 50 mL THF. The resulting solution was refluxed for 12 hours before concentration in vacuo. The crude solid was dissolved in DMF before addition of potassium carbonate (20 mmol, 2.76 g, 2.0 eq) and tetra-n-butylammonium iodide (1 mmol, 369 mg, 0.1 eq). Benzyl bromide (1 mmol, 1.78 mL, 1.5 eq) was added dropwise to the stirring solution and stirred at room temperature for 1 hour. Upon reaction completion as discerned by TLC, the solution was diluted with NH4Cl and water and extracted with EtOAc (3 x 100 mL). The combined organics were concentrated, and in the same flask, 30% TFA in DCM was added dropwise. After stirring for 1 hour, the solution was neutralized with NaCO3 and saturated NaHCO3, extracted with EtOAc (3 x 50 mL), and concentrated. Flash column chromatography purification (SiO2, 4:1 Hexanes:EtAOc) afforded 4-Benzyloxy-3,5-dichloroaniline as a white powder (1.1 g, 41% yield)1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.58 (d, J = 7.4 Hz, 2H), 7.42 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 2H), 7.38 (d, J = 7.3 Hz, 1H), 6.66 (s, 2H), 4.97 (s, 2H), 3.56 (s, 2H) (Supplementary Fig. 23).

### tert-Butyl 2-((4-(benzyloxy)-3,5-dichlorophenyl)amino) benzoate (Compound 4 in Supplementary Fig. 22)

Compound 3 (0.5 mmol, 134 mg, 1.0 eq), tert-butyl 2-bromobenzoate (i) (0.6 mmol, 116 µL,1.2 eq), cesium carbonate (0.7 mmol, 228 mg, 1.4 eq), RuPhos Pd G3 (0.05 mmol, 41.8 mg, 0.1 eq) were dissolved in toluene under argon. After refluxing under inert atmosphere for 24 hours, the reaction was filtered through celite and concentrated in vacuo. Flash column chromatography purification (SiO2, 95:5 Hexanes:EtAOc) afforded tert-Butyl 2-((4-(benzyloxy)-3,5-dichlorophenyl)amino)benzoate as a yellow solid (96 mg, 43%).1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3) δ 9.57 (s, 1H), 7.93 (dd, J = 8.0, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.60 – 7.55 (m, 2H), 7.44 – 7.40 (m, 2H), 7.36 (ddt, J = 10.2, 4.9, 1.5 Hz, 3H), 7.24 (dd, J = 8.5, 1.1 Hz, 1H), 7.22 (s, 2H), 6.80 (ddd, J = 8.1, 7.1, 1.1 Hz, 1H), 5.03 (s, 2H), 1.61 (s, 9H) (Supplementary Fig. 24).

### tert-Butyl 2-((3,5-dichloro-4-hydroxyphenyl)amino) benzoate (Compound 5 in Supplementary Fig. 22)

Compound 4 (0.2 mmol, 90 mg, 1 eq) and 10% palladium on carbon (0.017 mmol, 18 mg, 0.09 eq) and Compound 4 (0.2 mmol, 90 mg, 1 eq) were dissolved in a 1:1 MeOH:EtOAc mixture and stirred under an H2 atmosphere balloon for 5 hours. Upon observation of complete consumption of the starting material by TLC, the reaction was diluted with DCM, filtered through celite, and concentrated in vacuo. Flash column chromatography purification (SiO2, 5:1 Hexanes:EtOAc) afforded tert-butyl 2-((3,5-dichloro-4-hydroxyphenyl)amino)benzoate as a yellow solid (70 mg, 98% yield). The physical and spectral data are consistent with those reported previously6.

### S-(2-(2-(2-hydroxyethoxy)ethoxy)ethyl) ethanethioate (Compound iii in Supplementary Fig. 22)

Thioacetic acid (5 mmol, 350 µL, 1 eq) and potassium carbonate (5 mmol, 690 mg, 1 eq) were dissolved in anhydrous DMF (10 mL) and stirred for 10 minutes. To the resulting solution was added 2-(2-(2-bromoethoxy)ethoxy)ethan-1-ol (4.7 mmol,1.065 g, 0.95 eq) dropwise before stirring at 40° C for 2 hours. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure and crude residue purified by flash column chromatography (SiO2, 1:1 hexanes:EtOAc) to give a clear yellow-clear oil (755 mg, 77% yield).1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 3.67 (dd, J = 5.4, 3.8 Hz, 2H), 3.64 – 3.51 (m, 8H), 3.04 (t, J = 6.5 Hz, 2H), 2.28 (s, 3H) (Supplementary Fig. 25).

### tert-butyl 2-((4-(2-(2-(2-(acetylthio)ethoxy)ethoxy)ethoxy)-3,5-dichlorophenyl)amino) benzoate (Compound 6 in Supplementary Fig. 22)

Diisopropyl azodicarboxylate (80.8 µL, 0.4 mmol, 2 eq) and triphenylphosphine (104.8 mg, 0.4 mmol, 2 eq) were dissolved in 4 mL anhydrous THF and stirred for 30 minutes at room temperature. After 30 minutes, 5 (70 mg, 0.2 mmol, 1 eq) and iii (83.2 mg, 0.4 mmol, 2 eq), each dissolved in 0.2 mL THF, were added dropwise and stirred at room temperature for 2 hours. The reaction was concentrated in vacuo and the crude residue purified by column chromatography (SiO2, 4:1 Hex:EtOAc) to afford yellow syrup (35.4 mg, 32.6% yield).1H NMR (400 MHz, ACETONE-D6) δ 9.47 (s, 1H), 7.91 (dd, J = 8.0, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.41 (ddd, J = 8.7, 7.1, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.32 – 7.23 (m, 3H), 6.83 (ddd, J = 8.1, 7.0, 1.1 Hz, 1H), 4.15 (dd, J = 5.6, 4.1 Hz, 2H), 3.86 – 3.80 (m, 2H), 3.68 – 3.61 (m, 2H), 3.61 – 3.49 (m, 4H), 3.02 (t, J = 6.5 Hz, 2H), 2.27 (s, 3H), 1.58 (s, 9H) (Supplementary Fig. 26).

### 2-((3,5-dichloro-4-(2-(2-(2-(pyridin-2-yldisulfaneyl)ethoxy)ethoxy)ethoxy)phenyl)amino)benzoate (Biarylamine 7) (Step 7 in Supplementary Fig. 22)

Compound 6 (22.5 mg, 0.0414 mmol, 1 eq), and 2,2’-dithiopyridine (11 mg, 1.2 eq, 0.05 mmol) were dissolved in 1 mL anhydrous THF under an argon atmosphere. To the resulting solution was added freshly prepared NaOMe in THF (110 µL, 1.2 eq, 0.05 mmol) dropwise at 0 °C. The reaction was allowed to warm to room temperature over 2 hours before diluting with EtOAc and sequential brine and water washes. The combined organic extracts were removed under reduced pressure before addition of 1 mL TFA. After stirring at room temperature for 2 hours, the solvent was removed under reduced pressure and final compound Biarylamine 7 was purified via preparative HPLC (6.2 mg, 27% yield over two steps).1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO) δ 9.49 (s, 1H), 8.44 (dd, J = 4.8, 1.5 Hz, 1H), 7.92 (dd, J = 8.0, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.87 – 7.80 (m, 2H), 7.46 (ddd, J = 8.7, 7.1, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 7.34 (s, 2H), 7.27 – 7.19 (m, 2H), 6.89 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 1H), 4.12 – 4.07 (m, 2H), 3.81 – 3.75 (m, 2H), 3.67 – 3.58 (m, 4H), 3.51 (dd, J = 5.8, 3.6 Hz, 2H), 3.03 (d, J = 12.1 Hz, 2H) (Supplementary Fig. 27).

### Crystallization and structure determination of (Stilbene)2-TTR

Crystals of (Stilbene)2-TTR were grown analogously as previously described for TTR co-crystals with the covalent kinetic stabilizer 4-fluorophenyl 3-[(E)-2-(4-hydroxy-3,5-dimethylphenyl)ethenyl]benzoate (A93, PDB: 3HJ0).18 Data were collected at beamline 5.0.1 at the Advanced Light Source (Berkeley, CA) at a wavelength of 0.97741 Å and a temperature of 100 K. Frames were indexed and integrated using XDS19, the space group was assigned as P21212 using Pointless, and data were scaled using Scala.20 Five percent of reflections (randomly distributed) were flagged for model cross-validation using Rfree. 21 The (Stilbene)2-TTR crystal structure was solved by molecular replacement with Phaser22, using one monomer of human WT TTR as a search model. This model was generated from the co-crystal structure of tafamidis-bound WT TTR (PDB code: 3TCT23) with the ligands removed. Two subunits (one dimer) were found in the asymmetric unit. A small molecule stabilizer CIF dictionary was generated using ACEDRG24. The model was refined with iterative cycles of manual adjustment in Coot25 and refinement in Refmac5 using isotropic thermal parameters and hydrogen atoms at calculated positions26. Final adjustments were made after analysis with MolProbity and the wwPDB Validation System27. Due to the poor electron density surrounding the Lys15-stilbene linkage, the Lys15 sidechain and amide linkage could not be modeled with certainty. Data acquisition and modeling metrics are reported in Supplementary Table 1. The crystal structure was deposited to the Protein Data Bank under accession code 8U52.

### Mass spectrometry analysis of the (Stilbene)2-TTR conjugate for cryo-EM sample preparation

Before sample freezing, to verify that the major species in the (Stilbene)2-TTR sample is conjugated at both TTR binding sites, we carried out liquid chromatography followed by mass spectrometry (LC-MS, with LC equipment Agilent 1260 and mass spectrometer Agilent 6230 ESI-TOF) on a 3X diluted aliquot taken 3 hours after starting the reaction. For this, 5 µL of sample was injected in a reverse phase column (Agilent PLRP-S 2.1 x 50 mm 100A 5 µm) held at 60 °C and eluted with a water-to-acetonitrile gradient from 95% to 50% water, and a flow of 0.5 mL/min, 95% for 2 min then 50% water for 6 min.

To probe for the existence of A2 hydrolysis products, we carried out a time series of the A2+TTR reaction (same concentrations as used for sample preparation), injecting sample every 30 minutes for 5 hours. We monitored UV absorbance at 280 and 305 nm, as well as total ion count. We also analyzed samples containing only A2 (150µM A2 in TTR buffer + 10% DMSO) and only TTR (21µM TTR in TTR buffer). The baseline was removed using the ZhangFit method from the BaselineRemoval python package28. The exponential labeling temporal curves were generated by normalizing the area under the curve dividing by the maximum, after baseline removal. See results in Supplementary Fig. 31 and Supplementary Text 4.

### Unliganded human transthyretin cryo-EM sample preparation

A 50 µL solution of 1.7 mg/mL TTR in 100 mM KCl, 10 mM Phosphate buffer pH 7.6 (1 mM EDTA) was thawed at room temperature and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 16,000 x g, then diluted to 0.85 mg/mL. To make 20 µL of sample, we added 5 µL of TTR, 5 µL of TTR buffer, and 10 µL of 0.1% w/v beta-octyl glucoside (BOG) in TTR buffer, resulting in a final concentration of 7.31µM TTR and 0.01% w/v BOG. For grid preparation, R1.2/1.3 UltrAuFoil Holey Gold grids covered with monolayer graphene were oxidized using UV/ozone immediately before use. A manual plunger in a cold room at 6 °C and 90% humidity was used for flash freezing samples: 3 µL of sample were applied onto the graphene side of the grid after it was mounted on the plunger (always at the same height), and immediately blotted for 6 seconds by holding a ~1 x 6 cm piece of Whatman #1 filter paper parallel to the grid, in full contact. Timing was kept with the help of a metronome. The blotting countdown was started after the blotted liquid spot on the filter paper stopped spreading and the grid was plunged in liquid ethane at the same time the blotting paper was pulled back, in a single motion. Four grids were prepared this way, two pairs of identical grids blotted for 4 and 6 seconds, which were later clipped right before the imaging session. Imaging was performed on one of the grids blotted for 4 seconds.

### (Stilbene)2-TTR sample preparation for cryo-EM

A 50 µL solution of 1.7 mg/mL TTR in 100 mM KCl, 10 mM phosphate buffer pH 7.6 and 1 mM EDTA was thawed at room temperature and spun down for 10 minutes at 16000 x g. The TTR+A2 reaction was set up by adding 1 µL of a 1.5 mM solution of A2 in DMSO to 19 µL of the TTR stock solution specified immediately above. The A2+TTR reaction was incubated for 4 hours in the dark at room temperature. To make 20 µL of sample, we added 5 µL of TTR+A2 incubation reaction, 5 µL of TTR buffer, and 10 µL of 0.1% w/v beta-octyl glucoside (BOG) in TTR buffer, resulting in final concentrations: 7.31µM TTR, 18.75µM A2, 0.01% w/v BOG, and 1.25% v/v DMSO. Grids were prepared in the same way as the unliganded TTR conjugate sample, except that sample was blotted for 6 and 8 seconds.

### Single-bound (biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR cryo-EM sample preparation

A frozen (FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR Tetramer sample at 0.9 mg/mL was thawed at room temperature for 10 minutes, and then used to prepare grids. Grids were prepared in the same way as the (Stilbene)2-TTR conjugate sample, except that sample was blotted for 3 seconds.

### Cryo-EM data acquisition for single-particle analysis

Movies of all frozen-hydrated TTR samples were collected using a Talos Arctica TEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a field emission gun operating at 200 keV, equipped with a K2 Summit direct electron detector (Gatan, Inc.). Images were acquired using the Leginon automated data collection software29. Alignments were performed as previously described to minimize coma and establish parallel illumination30,31, and stage movement was used to center image holes in a 4 x 4 array for (Stilbene)2-TTR and unliganded TTR samples (graphene-coated R1.2/1.3 UltrAuFoil grids) and 8x8 array (graphene-coated 0.6/1 UltrAuFoil grids) for all other samples. Image shift with beam tilt compensation was used to acquire images within each hole in the centered array. Movies were collected in counting mode (0.562 Å /pixel) with an exposure rate of 2.3 e-/pix/s, with 50 frames (150 ms each) over 7.5 s, totaling an exposure of 55 e-/Å 2. A nominal defocus between –1.0 µm and –1.5 µm was used. The Appion image analysis environment32 was used to carry out real-time frame alignment and estimation of the contrast transfer function (CTF) to assess quality of ongoing data acquisition.

### Data analysis of unliganded TTR

Frames from 4,634 movies were aligned and combined applying a dose-weighting scheme using MotionCor233 from within the RELION 3.1 interface34. The aligned micrographs were imported to cryoSPARC 3.1.035 and CTF was estimated using CTFFind436, from within the cryoSPARC interface. Micrographs with estimated defocus values higher than 1.5 µm and reported CTF resolutions lower than 4 Å were discarded. Micrographs displaying no particles and torn or crumpled and stacked graphene were also discarded, resulting in 3,739 micrographs. For template-based particle picking, a density model of PDB 1TTR chains A, B, A’ and B’ (full native homotetramer) was generated using UCSF Chimera37 and low-pass filtered to 20 Å resolution in cryoSPARC. A maximum of 2000 picks was allowed per micrograph. Picks were inspected and curated using a normalized cross correlation (NCC) and local power (LP) thresholds. Based on visual inspection, using an NCC = ~0.5 provided the most accurate particle selection results, and lowering the local power threshold diminished the number of false positive picks on crumpled graphene areas. 1.95 million particle picks were extracted in 256-pixel boxes, and 2D averages were obtained using the 2D classification node in cryoSPARC, changing default settings to 120 classes, 1000 particles per class, 80 iterations and turning off ”force Max over poses/shifts,” an inner mask radius of 75 Å, and outer mask radius of 90 Å. Using a lower number of particles per class or keeping ”force Max over poses/shifts” selected resulted in a much lower number of different 2D classes with secondary structure features. We were not particularly stringent at the 2D cleanup stage, opting to maintain all classes remotely resembling TTR, which corresponded to 1.49 million particles. We then carried out a second round of 2D classification with the same parameters, which resulted in most classes being identifiable as TTR and with secondary structure features (Supplementary Fig. 2). The particles from these classes (1.3 million) were pooled and exported to RELION 3.1 using scripts from the pyem Github repository38.

In RELION 3.1, duplicates were removed and the particles re-extracted with a binning factor of 2. The rest of the workflow was carried out in RELION 3.2 (Supplementary Fig. 3). We performed a 3D classification imposing C2 symmetry, with the symmetry axis going through the TTR binding pockets, with K=6, tau=4 for 100 iterations. From the six resulting classes, four contained features clearly resembling secondary structure elements. We pooled these classes (870,899 particles) and carried out further 3D classification with C2 symmetry, K=4, tau=4, and 52 iterations. From the resulting four distinct classes, three had well-defined secondary structure elements, which we subsequently 3D refined separately. We used class 1 particles (335,266 particles) as input for 3D auto-refine without imposing symmetry and obtained a 3.5 Å resolution reconstruction. Using K-means clustering, we grouped micrographs by image shift using associated values stored in the Leginon database and assigned them to distinct optic groups. CTF refinement of per-particle, per-micrograph astigmatism, and per-optic group beam tilt using the K-means clustering of image shifts resulted in a 3.5 Å resolution reconstruction. Re-extraction of particles without binning, Bayesian polishing (model parameters s vel=1.2855, s div=4755, s acc=2.175, used for all polishing jobs in this dataset) and further CTF refinement improved resolution to 3.3 Å. Based on atomic structure modeling and comparison to previously determined TTR structures in the Protein Data Bank, we termed class 1 as ”canonical,” based on its overall similarity to the most common TTR structures determined by crystallography (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Figs. 4-5). Class 3 and 4 particles represented similarly compacted conformers of TTR relative to the canonical conformation, although Class 4 particles appeared to have better overall structural integrity, particularly at the periphery of the loops. We used class 4 particles (130,181 particles) as input for 3D auto-refine without imposing symmetry and obtained a 3.5 Å resolution reconstruction. CTF refinement of per-particle, per-micrograph astigmatism and per-optic group (see image shift clustering above) beam tilt resulted in a 3.5 Å resolution reconstruction. Re-extraction of particles without binning, Bayesian polishing and further CTF refinement improved resolution to 3.3 Å. We refer to this reconstruction as representative of a ”compressed” TTR structural state (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 4). We finally further analyzed the class 3 particles (202,700 particles) with 3D auto-refine without imposing symmetry, and obtained a 3.5 Å resolution reconstruction. CTF refinement of per-particle, per-micrograph astigmatism and per-optic group (see image shift clustering above) beam tilt resulted in a 3.5 Å resolution reconstruction. Re-extraction of particles without binning, Bayesian polishing and further CTF refinement improved resolution to 3.3 Å. While this subset of particles were similar in conformation to the compressed Class 4 reconstruction, the disordering of the peripheral loops led us to name this conformation as ”frayed” (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 4). The three resulting maps were sharpened by applying an overall B-factor being roughly ~1/2 of the sharpening B-factor suggested by RELION 3.1 post-processing node, to avoid excessive noise in the form of ”dust” in the final density. The B-factor applied to the canonical, compressed, and frayed reconstructions was –60, –55, and –55, respectively. See Supplementary Table 2 for further details.

### Cryo-EM data analysis of (Stilbene)2-TTR conjugate

Frames from 4,536 movies were aligned and combined applying a dose-weighting scheme using MotionCor233 from within the RELION 3.1 interface34. The aligned micrographs were imported to cryoSPARC 3.1.035 and CTF was estimated using CTFFind436, from within the cryoSPARC interface. Micrographs with estimated defocus values higher than 1.5 µm and reported CTF resolutions lower than 4 Å were discarded. Micrographs displaying no particles and torn or crumpled and stacked graphene were also discarded. For template-based particle picking, a density model of PDB 1TTR chains A, B, A’ and B’ (full native homotetramer) made generated using UCSF Chimera37 and low-pass filtered to 20 Å resolution in cryoSPARC. A maximum of 2000 picks was allowed per micrograph. Picks were inspected and curated using a normalized cross correlation (NCC) and local power (LP) thresholds. Based on visual inspection, using an NCC = ~0.5 provided the most accurate particle selection results, and lowering the local power threshold diminished the number of false positive picks on crumpled graphene areas. Picks were extracted in 256-pixel boxes, and 2D averages were obtained using the 2D classification node in cryoSPARC, changing default settings to 120 classes, 1000 particles per class, 80 iterations and turning off ”force Max over poses/shifts,” an inner mask radius of 75 Å, and outer mask radius of 90 Å. Using a lower number of particles per class or keeping ”force Max over poses/shifts” selected resulted in a much lower number of different 2D classes with secondary structure features. We were not particularly stringent at the 2D cleanup stage, opting to maintain all classes remotely resembling TTR, which contained approximately half of the particles. We then carried out a second round of 2D classification with the same parameters, which resulted in most classes being identifiable as TTR and with secondary structure features (Supplementary Fig. 10). The particles from these classes (1.03 million) were pooled and exported to RELION 3.1 using scripts from the pyem Github repository38.

Duplicate particles were removed, remaining particles were re-centered and extracted to the same box size using RELION 3.1. The rest of the workflow was carried out in RELION 3.2 (Supplementary Fig. 11). Initial 3D auto-refinement without imposing symmetry led to a 4 Å reconstruction according to a Fourier Shell Correlation (FSC) cutoff at 0.143. CTF refinement of per-particle defocus, per-micrograph astigmatism, and per-group beam tilt using K-means clustering of image shifts (see unliganded TTR image processing methods) led to a reconstruction at 3.4 Å resolution. Further CTF refinement including third-order aberrations improved resolution to 3.1 Å, and Bayesian polishing (model parameters: s_vel=0.96, s_div=10020, s_acc=5.88) improved the resolution further to 2.9 Å. While the preceding steps improved resolution, the resulting density seemed ”stretched” or ”smeared” in one direction, indicating anisotropic resolution. To solve this, we attempted several 3D-classification schemes, hoping to identify a subset of particles that might produce a more isotropic-resolution reconstruction. 3D classification with 6 classes, a tau value of 4, a circular mask of 90 Å, and no limitation in the E-step resolution resulted in two seemingly isotropic classes after 86 iterations (containing a total of 289,981 particles). Particles from these classes were combined, and 3D auto-refinement led to a 2.7 Å resolution reconstruction where a single stilbene rotamer could be identified in the pocket formed by chains A and C. We categorized this reconstruction as having a canonical conformation due to its similarity to our unliganded TTR canonical structure (Fig. 2, Supplementary Figs. 5 and 12). All other classes resembling TTR (736,525 particles) were pooled and used for 3D classification with 6 classes, tau value=4, and enforcing C2 symmetry with the symmetry axis (Z axis) going through the binding sites. From this classification we were able to isolate 2 more states via 3D auto-refinement without imposed symmetry, one of which was a lower resolution version of the canonical reconstruction (133,817 particles), while the other (105,961 particles, 3.1 Å resolution) we categorized as compressed based on its similarity to the unliganded compressed conformer (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 12). The two resulting maps were sharpened by applying an overall B-factor being roughly ~1/2 of the sharpening B-factor suggested by RELION 3.1 post-processing node, to avoid excessive noise in the form of ”dust” in the final density. The B-factor applied to the canonical and compressed reconstructions was –60 in both cases. See Supplementary Table 3 for further details.

### Data analysis of single-bound (biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR

Two datasets consisting of 6,017 and 6,088 movies were acquired using two different grids prepared in the same freezing session and processed separately using the same processing strategies as for the prior two datasets, resulting in 4,002 / 3,937 micrographs yielding 1.23 / 1.42 million particle picks, and 1.17 / 1.26 million particles after 2D cleanup (Supplementary Fig. 17). The particles were combined for 3D processing in RELION 3.1 (Supplementary Fig. 18), where duplicates were removed and particles re-extracted with a binning factor of 2. 3D classification into 6 classes was performed with tau=4 for 58 iterations imposing C2 symmetry (symmetry axis going through the binding sites). From the six resulting classes, four had discernible secondary structure elements. We refined (3D auto-refine) each of them separately, but only class 3 (233,376 particles, corresponding to the compressed state) and class 5 (432,655 particles corresponding to the frayed state) had isotropic directional resolution, and yielded ligand density in one binding site (Fig. 3, Supplementary Fig. 18).

3D auto-refinement of class 3 imposing C2 symmetry yielded a 4 Å reconstruction. CTF refinement of per-particle defocus, per-micrograph astigmatism, and per-optic group beam tilt (see image shift clustering above) led to an improved reconstruction at 3.7 Å resolution. Re-extraction without binning and further CTF refinement improved resolution to 3.6 Å (C2 imposed). Bayesian polishing improved resolution to 3.5 Å (C2 imposed). Refinement of per-particle defocus, per-micrograph astigmatism, beam tilt, and third and fourth order aberrations, as well as 3D auto-refinement without imposing symmetry yielded a reconstruction at 3.5 Å resolution. However, this reconstruction did not contain clear ligand density in either of the two binding sites. To separate different states with a ligand in each binding site, we created two spherical masks encompassing one binding site each and subtracted the signal outside of it from each of them in each particle, using the ”Particle Subtraction” node in RELION 3.1. From this process we obtained two new particle stacks in which only the signal from one of the binding sites remained. We carried out 3D classification without alignment with two classes and a tau value of 2 for 100 iterations and obtained two classes for each of them. One of those classification runs yielded a class with apparent ligand density (class 1, 168,443 particles) and one without (class 2, 64,933 particles). 3D auto-refinement without imposed symmetry of these classes after reconstitution of subtracted signal yielded a 3.4 Å reconstruction with clear ligand density in the binding site (168,443 particles from class 1, (biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR compressed state, Supplementary Table 4) and one at 3.8 Å without any density in the pocket (64,933 particles from class 2) (Fig. 3, Supplementary Figs. 18 and 19).

In contrast to class 3, class 5 displayed a small bi-lobed body of density in one of the binding pockets, which we attributed to the biarylamine moiety, even before refinement. Since per-optic group beam tilt was already calculated for class 3, they were imparted on class 5 particles before carrying out any further analysis. 3D auto-refinement did not improve the resolution or interpretability of class 5, so 3D classification was performed with 6 classes, tau=4, and 70 iterations, which yielded a class (class 6, 110,253 particles) that when refined with 3D auto-refinement imposing C2 symmetry, yielded a 4.1 Å reconstruction. 3D auto-refinement with C2 symmetry after re-extraction without binning, CTF refinement (per-particle defocus, per-micrograph astigmatism and per-optic group beam tilt) and Bayesian polishing yielded a reconstruction at 3.9 Å. Further CTF refinement (per-particle defocus, per-micrograph astigmatism, and per-optic group beam tilt as well as third and fourth-order aberrations) yielded a 4.1 Å reconstruction after 3D auto-refinement without imposing symmetry (biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR frayed state Supplementary Figs. 18 and 19, Supplementary Table 4).

### Calculation of TTR H-strand dihedral angles and elongation distance

The dihedral angle between H strands of monomers on opposing sides of a binding pocket is defined by the Cα atoms of residues 114A→17A→117C→114C and 114B→117B→117D→114D. The overall TTR extension lengths, as labeled in the cartoons in figures 1–3, are the averages of the distances between Cα atoms pairs from Leu58 in chains A and B and chains C and D.

### Calculation of Cα dihedral changes between conformations

The change in Cα dihedral angles, as initially presented in39, is used to describe hinge-like molecular motions. The Cα dihedral angle at a given position X is calculated from the position of the Cα of positions X+2, X+1, X and X–1. This angle is defined in the –180° to 180° space, and changes are expressed in absolute values to facilitate visualization.

### Modeling of atomic coordinates in cryo-EM-derived density for all analyzed samples

All atomic coordinate modeling used to create models for cryo-EM datasets presented in this work followed a similar procedure as described below. We began with a model from human wild-type transthyretin, PDB 2QGB. Symmetry expansion was applied in pymol40 to generate a tetramer, and chains A’ and B’ were changed to C and D respectively. Non-protein atoms and alternative rotamers were removed. The initial model was docked and aligned to density in UCSF Chimera. The saved and translated copy of the starting model was docked in the density using the ”Dock in map” node in Phenix41. The resulting model was refined in real space using the ”Real-space refinement” node in Phenix, with options ”minimization global”, ”rigid body”, ”local grid search” and ”adp” turned on. Secondary structure or initial model restraints were not used. The resulting model was inspected in Coot42, where side-chain atoms without density were deleted, and ”real-space refine zone” was applied to 8–10 overlapping residue stretches throughout the whole protein. Attempts to remove Ramachandran and side-chain geometry outliers were made by real-space and manual refinement, as well as peptide bond flipping. When considered adequate by local resolution, water molecules were modeled considering their location and likely coordination, as well as their modeling in other TTR structures. For data derived from the (Stilbene)2-TTR sample, lysine 15 covalently modified with the stilbene was modeled as a non-canonical amino-acid with the three-letter code A2K. Parameters for A2K were generated using eLBOW and the Lys-stilbene amide bond was modeled in cis as suggested by the density in the highest resolution binding site (chains A and C of the canonical state density). For data derived from the (biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR sample, parameter files and models for the small molecule moiety were obtained from the Protein Data Bank, as crystal structures of this complex have already been published6. In (biarylamine-FT2-WT)1(C10A)3 TTR position B10 was modeled as cysteine, while A10, C10 and D10 were modeled as alanine. This decision was based on the local density features in the compressed state, given its higher resolution.

In all models, after the initial manual refinement in coot the model was refined again using the ”Real-space refinement” node in Phenix41. This process was repeated until no changes were considered by manually inspecting the model in Coot; i.e., ”Real-space refinement” in Phenix was the last step in all modeling. Data modeling statistics produced with Phenix41 are reported in Supplementary Tables 2-4. Map-to-model Fourier correlation plots are presented in Supplementary Figs. 4, 12, and 19.

### Figure generation

The DeepEMHancer43 software package was used to sharpen the density maps for generating figure panels depicting the TTR reconstructions. These DeepEMHancer-generated maps were not used for modeling or interpretation. UCSF ChimeraX44 was used to create the surface representations of cryo-EM densities and ribbon/licorice representations of atomic models. UCSF Chimera37 was used to generate the wire-mesh representations that include the atomic models.

### Ligand-binding pocket volume measurement with Fpocket

Measuring pocket volume in a consistent and comparable way can be challenging, as automatic detection may produce very different results in similar structures depending on the area accessible to a solvent-like probe, methods for defining the limits of the pocket, and slight structural differences such as sidechain conformation. For these reasons, we decided to use the Fpocket functionality45 that defines pockets by the presence of a ligand, and modeled missing sidechains in our seven TTR structures using Rosetta46 (see below). To account for ambiguities in the density, we generated 10 models per cryo-EM density (70 in total), which enabled us to estimate the error associated with the measurements (Supplementary Fig. 32). To minimize noise coming from ligand placement and chemistry, and to enable ligand-based pocket volume measurement in unliganded TTR, we took the canonical (Stilbene)2-TTR conjugate structure, aligned it to each of the other six species, and grafted the atomic coordinates of the stilbene moiety in each of them. We then ran Fpocket in the newly generated artificial (Stilbene)2-TTR complexes.

### Full-atom model refinement with Rosetta

To obtain reasonable estimates of pocket volume, we used Rosetta to generate full-atom models from the partial (missing side chains) models made in Coot. We followed the protocol described in47. Briefly: rotamer positions were optimized by Monte Carlo optimization of the Rosetta score function47 and density values, followed by gradient minimization of all atom positions, allowing covalent interactions to deviate lightly from their theoretical optima. These steps were carried for four iterations going from low-repulsion (”soft ball” atoms) to full-repulsion van der Waals potential, in a routine called ”FastRelax”. The necessary scripts and command-line options are provided in the supplementary materials. Ten structures were produced for each initial Coot model to account for uncertainty derived from the lack of density. It should be emphasized that, given the conservative nature of the FastRelax protocol, the resulting full atom models only differ by small backbone and side-chain motions.

### MD Simulations of the (Stilbene)2-TTR Conjugate

TTR structures with covalent stilbene were prepared with pdb4amber within AmberTools2148, including residue protonation-state determination with REDUCE49. Structurally determined water molecules were also removed. Antechamber50 was used to calculate AM1-BCC partial-charges for the ligand-residue adduct via the SQM method. Lysine 15 with attached stilbene ligand was given N-methyl and C-acetyl caps prior to Antechamber calculations. The ff19SB51 forcefield was used for protein residues, while GAFF252 was used for the stilbene ligand. To maintain planarity of the amide linkage between the K15 residue and the stilbene ligand, the Nz was explicitly parameterized with the GAFF2 sp2 amide N atom type (”n”) instead of the N3 ff19SB atom type. An OPC53 water box was placed around the protein with at least a 15 Å buffer; then Na+ and Cl- ions were added to neutralize the system. Minimization and simulation were performed with OpenMM v7.7.054. Following an energy minimization, the simulation was equilibrated for 0.1 nanoseconds to prior to the production run of 500 nanoseconds. The simulation was run with an NPT ensemble at 310 K and 1.0 ATM with periodic boundary conditions. A Monte Carlo barostat was used with an interval of 25 steps along with a Langevin Middle integrator/thermostat with friction coefficient of 1.0/ps. A 2 fs timestep was used. The Particle Mesh Ewald method55 was used for electrostatic interactions with a nonbonded cutoff of 1.2 nm and a tolerance of 0.0005. The length of bonds involving hydrogen atoms were constrained and water molecules were kept rigid with a constraint tolerance of 0.000001. The resulting trajectory was autoimaged with CPPTRAJ56 and analyzed with MDAnalysis in Python57.

### Supplementary Material



# SUPPLEMENTAL FILE 1: nihpp-2024.01.23.576879v1.pdf

# Preparing to download ...

[HHS Vulnerability Disclosure](https://www.hhs.gov/vulnerability-disclosure-policy/index.html)

# SUPPLEMENTAL FILE 2: PMC10849623

[File available at: automated_output/TTR/20251125_114028/pmc_fulltext/38328110_supplements/PMC10849623]

