# MAIN TEXT

## Utilizing human induced pluripotent stem cells to study atrial arrhythmias in the short QT syndrome

### Abstract

BackgroundAmong the monogenic inherited causes of atrial fibrillation is the short QT syndrome (SQTS), a rare channelopathy causing atrial and ventricular arrhythmias. One of the limitations in studying the mechanisms and optimizing treatment of SQTS-related atrial arrhythmias has been the lack of relevant human atrial tissues models.ObjectiveTo generate a unique model to study SQTS-related atrial arrhythmias by combining the use of patient-specific human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs), atrial-specific differentiation schemes, two-dimensional tissue modeling, optical mapping, and drug testing.Methods and resultsSQTS (N588K KCNH2 mutation), isogenic-control, and healthy-control hiPSCs were coaxed to differentiate into atrial cardiomyocytes using a retinoic-acid based differentiation protocol. The atrial identity of the cells was confirmed by a distinctive pattern of MLC2v downregulation, connexin 40 upregulation, shorter and triangular-shaped action potentials (APs), and expression of the atrial-specific acetylcholine-sensitive potassium current. In comparison to the healthy- and isogenic control cells, the SQTS-hiPSC atrial cardiomyocytes displayed abbreviated APs and refractory periods along with an augmented rapidly activating delayed-rectifier potassium current (IKr). Optical mapping of a hiPSC-based atrial tissue model of the SQTS displayed shortened APD and altered biophysical properties of spiral waves induced in this model, manifested by accelerated spiral-wave frequency and increased rotor curvature. Both AP shortening and arrhythmia irregularities were reversed by quinidine and vernakalant treatment, but not by sotalol.ConclusionsPatient-specific hiPSC-based atrial cellular and tissue models of the SQTS were established, which provide examples on how this type of modeling can shed light on the pathogenesis and pharmacological treatment of inherited atrial arrhythmias.

### Introduction

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common sustained arrhythmia and is associated with doubling in all-cause mortality, a five-fold increase in stroke and accelerated development of heart failure [1,2]. While AF is linked to various environmental and genetic risk factors, the functional consequences of these factors on human atrial cells have not been fully elucidated. In addition, current anti-arrhythmic drug treatments for AF are inefficient, suffer from adverse side effects and display significant ventricular pro-arrhythmic risk.

One of the major barriers to an improved mechanistic understanding of AF, and thus in the pipeline of drug development, has been a lack of appropriate human cardiac tissue models, specifically those reflecting patient-specific abnormalities. The introduction of the human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) technology [3] coupled with improved methods for cardiomyocyte (CM) differentiation [4,5], brought a unique value to the fields of cardiac disease modeling [[6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14]] and drug testing [[15], [16], [17]]. Up until recent years, however, most studies have used a mixed population of differentiated hiPSC-CMs (ventricular, atrial and nodal cells) with primarily ventricular-subtype and were mainly restricted to the level of single cells or small cell-clusters. Bearing in mind that AF is a disease driven by re-entrant activity occurring distinctly in atrial tissue, the recent derivation of development-biology inspired chamber-specific hiPSC differentiation systems giving rise to purified population of atrial cells [[18], [19], [20]] along with the establishment of hiPSC-based atrial tissue engineering strategies [[21], [22], [23], [24]] may provide the necessary tools to also utilize hiPSC modeling for AF investigation.

One of the genetic diseases with clear association to AF is the short QT syndrome (SQTS), an autosomal dominant primary electrical disease of the heart that results in an increased susceptibility to ventricular and atrial tachyarrhythmias [[25], [26], [27]]. The disease is genetically heterogeneous but is most commonly caused by a mutation in the hERG/KCNH2 gene responsible for the rapid activating delayed rectifier potassium current (SQTS type 1, SQTS1) [25,28]. The N588K missense mutation in the KCNH2 gene accounts for approximately 90% of the positive genotype SQTS cases and leads to a gain-of-function mutation in the rapid component of the delayed rectifier current IKr [29]. While there is data regarding the functional impact of this mutation on the IKr current and resulting cellular electrophysiological properties in cellular heterologous expression systems [29] and in ventricular cells [[30], [31], [32]], its effect on human atrial cell electrophysiology has not been studied.

In the current study, we aimed to establish a patient-specific hiPSC atrial cellular and tissue model of the SQTS, to characterize the disease's impact on the electrical properties of the atrial CMs at the single-cell and atrial syncytium levels, dissect the resulting arrhythmia properties, and assess the potential therapeutic potential of different anti-arrhythmic agents.

### Methods

The hiPSCs were differentiated into atrial and ventricular cardiomyocytes according to a modification of a previously-described, embryoid-body (EBs) based, chamber-specific differentiation protocol [18,21,22]. Briefly, hiPSCs at 80–90% confluence were dissociated and divided into suspensions of ∼4 million cells in low volume aggregation media supplemented with 1:300 Matrigel. They were then incubated overnight on an orbital shaker to generate EBs. Aggregation media contained StemPro-34 media with the addition of 2 mM glutamine, 150 μg/ml transferrin, 50μg/ml ascorbic acid, 50μg/ml monothioglycerol, 1 ng/ml BMP4 and 10 ng/ml rock inhibitor Y-27632. On day 1 of differentiation, a mesoderm-induction medium was used consisting of all of the above in addition to 10 ng/ml BMP4, 8 ng/ml Activin and 5 ng/ml FGF minus Y-27632. On day 3, the medium was changed to StemPro-34 with the addition of 2 mM glutamine, 150 μg/ml transferrin, 50 μg/ml ascorbic acid, 50 μg/ml monothioglycerol, 10 ng/ml VEGF and 1 μM IWP2. For atrial-specific differentiation, 0.75 μM retinoic acid (RA) was administered on days 3–5. On day 5, the culture medium was replaced with CDM3 medium [4], which was refreshed every 4 days. On day 21, beating EBs were collected and enzymatically dissociated with collagenase type 2 for further experimentation.

To quantify hiPSC cardiomyocyte content and chamber-specific differentiation, we performed flow-cytometry analysis using intracellular staining of cardiac troponin T (cTnT) and myosin light chain 2 ventricle (MLC-2v). To this end, hiPSC differentiated cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with 90% methanol in PBS (20 min on ice) and washed with PBS containing 0.5% BSA (Sigma). Cells were then stained overnight (4 °C) with the unconjugated primary antibodies targeting cTnT (MA5–12960, Thermo-Fisher Scientific) and MLC-2 V (ab79935, Abcam) at 1:500 dilution in flow-cytometry buffer consisting of PBS with 0.5% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco). Cells were washed again with PBS and stained with secondary antibodies (PE anti-rabbit 1:50 MLC2v//Cy5 anti-mouse 1:200 cTnT) diluted in PBS with 5% FCS for 1 h at 4 °C. Flow-cytometry analysis was performed with the LSR FortessaII flow cytometer (BD-Biosciences), and FlowJo software.

Cells were seeded at low-confluence on Matrigel-coated 12 mm glass coverslips and cultured with RPMI/B27 for 7 days. APs and K+ currents were recorded at 7–10 days post-plating with the whole-cell patch clamp technique using the current-clamp and voltage-clamp modes respectively. Experiments were performed with an extracellular solution consisting of (in mmol/L): NaCl-140, KCl-5.4, CaCl2–1.8, MgCl2–1, glucose-10, and HEPES-10 (pH -7.4 with NaOH). The pipette solution consisted of (in mmol/L): KCl-120, MgCl2–1, MgATP-3, HEPES-10 and EGTA-10 (pH -7.2 with KOH). For K+ current recordings, extracellular solution was supplemented with 2 μM nifedipine.

APs were elicited at 1 Hz frequency at 33 °C. For refractory period (RP) measurements, a train of 10 stimuli (S1) was applied at a rate of 1.5 Hz with a current twice above the pacing threshold. This was followed by an extra stimulus (S2) with the S1-S2 coupling interval decreasing in 5 ms decrements. The RP was defined as the shortest coupling interval after which an AP could not be elicited.

Ikr current was elicited in the voltage-clamp mode from a holding potential of -40 mV using 4 s depolarizing steps at voltages between -30 mV and 50 mV in 20 mV increments. Ikr was defined as the E4031 (5 μM) sensitive current at the end of the depolarizing step. IkAch was elicited from a holding potential of -40 mV by applying a 500 ms depolarizing pulse to a voltage of 20 mV followed by a 400 ms hyperpolarizing ramp to −120 mV. IkAch was defined as the carbachol (10 μM) sensitive current at the end of hyperpolarizing ramp. Currents were recorded at room temperature. Data was digitized at 20 KHz and filtered using 5 KHz low-pass filter. Amplification, acquisition and analysis were performed using MultiClamp 700B, Digidata 1440A and pClamp11.

21–25 days post-differentiation, beating EBs were enzymatically dissociated into single cells using mechanical and enzymatic dissociation (collagenase type 2, 220 units/ml, at room temperature for 14 h). The resulting cells were either re-seeded at low confluence for patch-clamp experiments or immunostaining. Alternatively, hiPSC-derived atrial cells were seeded as 20 microliter drops containing ∼700,000 cells on Matrigel-coated 35 mm plastic dishes. The resulting hiPSC-ACS monolayers were left to attach to the plates overnight and then flooded with 2 ml RPMI/B27.

The optical mapping setup consisted of a high speed EMCCD camera (Evolve® 512 Delta, Photometrics, 512 × 512 pixels) mounted on a fluorescent macroscope (MVX10, Olympus) equipped with 0.25 NA 6.3× - 63× (MVPLAPO 1×, Olympus) [30,33]. The default field of view achieved for illumination and imaging by setting the zoom body on 2.5× was 10 mm.

The hiPSC-ACSs were loaded with the voltage sensitive dye FluoVolt diluted 1:1000 in RPMI/B27 culture media at 37 °C for 30 min. The tissues were excited using LEDs (X-Cite® TURBO, Excelitas Technologies) with peak wavelength of 475 and emission was passed through 495 long-pass dichroic mirror and filtered using 525/50 band-pass filter (All from Chroma). Fluorescence was acquired at 4 × 4 binning with 3.847 ms sampling interval (∼260 frames/s).

An IDL-based custom-written software, courtesy of prof. Bum-Rak Choi (Brown university), was used for acquisition and analysis of optical mapping videos as previously described [33]. Analysis included generation of activation and APD80 maps along with calculation of mean APD80 and CV for each specimen. For the generation of activation maps, the local activation time (LAT) at each pixel was defined as the point of the local maximum of the 1st derivative. To derive APD80 maps, APD80 was defined as the time interval between the LAT and the time point of 80% repolarization. Phase mapping analysis was performed using a previously described MATLAB-based custom-written software [30,33]. When analyzing rotors, the singularity point (SP) was defined as the pixel where all AP phases conjoin. The rotor radius, a parameter that is inversely proportional to the rotor's curvature, was defined as the distance from the SP to the wavefront by drawing a perpendicular line to the wavefront adjacent to the SP.

Electrical stimulation was delivered using custom-made platinum electrodes using a stimulus isolation unit (SIU-102, Warner-instruments). Stimuli consisted of 5 ms pulse at the desired frequency. Arrhythmia induction was achieved by delivering trains of high current pulses with varying frequencies near the tissue's refractory period.

The hiPSC-CMs, cultured on 12 mm Matrigel-coated glass coverslips, were fixed using 4% PFA in PBS for 20 min at room temperature, washed three times with PBS, permeabilized with 1% Triton for 10 min, and then blocked with PBS containing 5% horse serum for 1 h. Specimens were then incubated overnight at 4 °C with the primary antibodies targeting sarcomeric α-actinin (1:150, mouse, Sigma-Aldrich, A7811), connexin 40 (Cx40; 1:100, goat, Santa-Cruz, sc-20,466), and MLC-2v (1:150, rabbit, ab79935, Abcam). Specimens were washed three times with PBS and incubated for 1 h with the secondary antibodies. All primary and secondary antibodies were diluted in PBS containing 3% horse-serum and 0.1% Triton. All specimens were also stained with DAPI (1:500) and inspected under a Zeiss LSM-710 laser-scanning confocal microscope.

Differentiated EBs were lysed with ice-cold RIPA lysis buffer and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). 40 μg of protein from the samples were mixed and resolved in 4× Laemmli Sample Buffer (BioRad) and incubated in room temperature for 30 min before loading on proper polyacrylamide gels (Bio-Rad). The electrophoresed proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes via Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer System (Bio-Rad). The membrane were incubated for 60 min with 3.5% dry milk (Santa Cruz) in Tris-buffered saline (TBST) to block nonspecific binding sites. The membranes were incubated with the primary antibodies at 4 °C. The specific primary antibodies used for detection of antigens of interest: Anti connexin 40 (1:1000 in 5% BSA in TBST, AB1726) and Anti β actin (1:1000 in 5% BSA in TBST, ab8224). Primary antibody incubation followed by HRP-coupled secondary antibodies for 2 h at room temperature (BioRad, 1:5000 in 3.5% milk in TBST). Proteins were revealed with ECL Prime (BioRad) and images were acquired using a LAS4000 Camera (GE Healthcare). For quantitation, band intensities were measured, and densitometry was determined using imageJ.

Summary of the data in each experiment are described in the result section as mean ± standard deviation. In the figures, data are presented in box and whiskers plots (except Figs. 1I, 2B and 5) indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. Each data set was tested for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk normality test and appropriate parametric/non-parametric statistical tests were then performed accordingly. The specific statistical tests used for each experiment are described in the figure legends.Fig. 1Molecular and electrical characterization of hiPSC-atrial and ventricular CMs. [A] Schematic representation of the chamber-specific EB-differentiation protocol. RA was added on days 3–5 to induce atrial differentiations. [B] Summary of flow-cytometry analysis showing the percentages of cTnT+ cells (left) as well as cTnT+ MLC2v + cells (right) in the ventricular and atrial differentiations. n = 12 independent differentiations. [C] Immunostaining of hiPSC-ventricular (upper panel) and atrial (lower panel) CMs for α-actinin and MLC2v. [D] Western blot analysis of Connexin40 in hiPSC-ventricular and atrial CMs (upper panel). Summary of Connexin40 signal intensity (normalized to actin) in hiPSC-atrial and ventricular CMs (n = 5 from two independent differentiations), undifferentiated hiPSC and COS7 cell line (n = 1 each, lower panel). [E] Immunostaining of hiPSC-ventricular (upper panel) and atrial (lower panel) CMs for α-actinin and Connexin40. [F] Representative action potential recording of hiPSC- ventricular and atrial CMs. [G] Summary of APD at 90%,50% and 30% repolarization (left panel) and ratios of both APD30 and APD50 to APD90 (right panel) from hiPSC-ventricular (n = 10 from 3 independent differentiations) and atrial (n = 38 from 5 independent differentiations) CMs. [H] Representative recordings of the inward rectifier acetyl-choline sensitive potassium current density IKACh in hiPSC- ventricular and atrial CMs. IKACh (blue) was calculated by subtracting the current trace following 10 μM carbachol (red) application from the baseline current (black). [I] Summary of the current-voltage relationship of IKACh (n = 4 and 3, respectively, from 2 independent differentiations). Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. The data values in (I) are presented as mean ± SD. Statistical comparison was carried out using paired t-test (B, left panel), Wilcoxon signed-rank test (B, right panel), Mann-Whitney test (G) as well as repeated measurements two-way ANOVA followed by Sidak post-hoc analysis (I). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. White scale bar = 20 μm. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)Fig. 1Fig. 2Patch clamp AP and IKr recordings of SQTS-hiPSC- atrial CMs.[A] Representative voltage-clamp recordings of the E4031-sensitive IKr current from atrial CMs derived from healthy- (upper panel), SQTS- (middle panel) and isogenic-control- (lower panel) hiPSC lines. [B] Summary of current-voltage relationship of IKr in hiPSC-atrial CMs from healthy-control (n = 7), SQTS (n = 5) and isogenic-control (n = 4) cell lines. Black arrow indicates the end-pulse current measured, defined as the mean current at the last 50 ms prior to the end of the voltage step. Data were obtained from 3 independent differentiations. [C] Representative whole-cell patch clamp recordings exhibiting paced APs from healthy-control (upper panel), SQTS (middle panel) and isogenic-control (lower panel) hiPSC-atrial CMs. [D] Summary of measured APD90 values from SQTS- (n = 22 from 3 independent differentiations) and both healthy (n = 38 from 5 independent differentiations) and isogenic (n = 16 from 3 independent differentiations) controls- hiPSC-atrial CMs. [E] Whole-cell patch clamp of atrial-CMs from healthy-control (upper panel), SQTS (middle panel) and isogenic-control (lower panel) subjected to refractory period measurements using S1-S2 protocol (S1 at 1.5 Hz, S2 in 5-ms decrements). RP was defined as the longest coupling interval resulting in failure of AP initiation (dashed lines). [F] Summary of RP values from SQTS- (n = 7 from 4 independent differentiations) and both healthy (n = 10) and isogenic (n = 5) controls- hiPSC-atrial CMs (from 3 independent differentiations each). Scale bar = 2 mm. The data values in (B) are presented as mean ± SD. Experiment's results in (D) and (F) are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. Statistical comparison was carried out using repeated measurements two-way ANOVA (B) as well as one-way ANOVA test (D,F), both followed by Sidak post-hoc analysis. *, † p < 0.05; **, † †p < 0.01; ***,†††p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001.Fig. 2

Molecular and electrical characterization of hiPSC-atrial and ventricular CMs. [A] Schematic representation of the chamber-specific EB-differentiation protocol. RA was added on days 3–5 to induce atrial differentiations. [B] Summary of flow-cytometry analysis showing the percentages of cTnT+ cells (left) as well as cTnT+ MLC2v + cells (right) in the ventricular and atrial differentiations. n = 12 independent differentiations. [C] Immunostaining of hiPSC-ventricular (upper panel) and atrial (lower panel) CMs for α-actinin and MLC2v. [D] Western blot analysis of Connexin40 in hiPSC-ventricular and atrial CMs (upper panel). Summary of Connexin40 signal intensity (normalized to actin) in hiPSC-atrial and ventricular CMs (n = 5 from two independent differentiations), undifferentiated hiPSC and COS7 cell line (n = 1 each, lower panel). [E] Immunostaining of hiPSC-ventricular (upper panel) and atrial (lower panel) CMs for α-actinin and Connexin40. [F] Representative action potential recording of hiPSC- ventricular and atrial CMs. [G] Summary of APD at 90%,50% and 30% repolarization (left panel) and ratios of both APD30 and APD50 to APD90 (right panel) from hiPSC-ventricular (n = 10 from 3 independent differentiations) and atrial (n = 38 from 5 independent differentiations) CMs. [H] Representative recordings of the inward rectifier acetyl-choline sensitive potassium current density IKACh in hiPSC- ventricular and atrial CMs. IKACh (blue) was calculated by subtracting the current trace following 10 μM carbachol (red) application from the baseline current (black). [I] Summary of the current-voltage relationship of IKACh (n = 4 and 3, respectively, from 2 independent differentiations). Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. The data values in (I) are presented as mean ± SD. Statistical comparison was carried out using paired t-test (B, left panel), Wilcoxon signed-rank test (B, right panel), Mann-Whitney test (G) as well as repeated measurements two-way ANOVA followed by Sidak post-hoc analysis (I). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. White scale bar = 20 μm. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Patch clamp AP and IKr recordings of SQTS-hiPSC- atrial CMs.

[A] Representative voltage-clamp recordings of the E4031-sensitive IKr current from atrial CMs derived from healthy- (upper panel), SQTS- (middle panel) and isogenic-control- (lower panel) hiPSC lines. [B] Summary of current-voltage relationship of IKr in hiPSC-atrial CMs from healthy-control (n = 7), SQTS (n = 5) and isogenic-control (n = 4) cell lines. Black arrow indicates the end-pulse current measured, defined as the mean current at the last 50 ms prior to the end of the voltage step. Data were obtained from 3 independent differentiations. [C] Representative whole-cell patch clamp recordings exhibiting paced APs from healthy-control (upper panel), SQTS (middle panel) and isogenic-control (lower panel) hiPSC-atrial CMs. [D] Summary of measured APD90 values from SQTS- (n = 22 from 3 independent differentiations) and both healthy (n = 38 from 5 independent differentiations) and isogenic (n = 16 from 3 independent differentiations) controls- hiPSC-atrial CMs. [E] Whole-cell patch clamp of atrial-CMs from healthy-control (upper panel), SQTS (middle panel) and isogenic-control (lower panel) subjected to refractory period measurements using S1-S2 protocol (S1 at 1.5 Hz, S2 in 5-ms decrements). RP was defined as the longest coupling interval resulting in failure of AP initiation (dashed lines). [F] Summary of RP values from SQTS- (n = 7 from 4 independent differentiations) and both healthy (n = 10) and isogenic (n = 5) controls- hiPSC-atrial CMs (from 3 independent differentiations each). Scale bar = 2 mm. The data values in (B) are presented as mean ± SD. Experiment's results in (D) and (F) are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. Statistical comparison was carried out using repeated measurements two-way ANOVA (B) as well as one-way ANOVA test (D,F), both followed by Sidak post-hoc analysis. *, † p < 0.05; **, † †p < 0.01; ***,†††p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001.

### Differentiation of hiPSCs to ventricular and atrial cardiomyocytes

The hiPSCs were differentiated into atrial and ventricular cardiomyocytes according to a modification of a previously-described, embryoid-body (EBs) based, chamber-specific differentiation protocol [18,21,22]. Briefly, hiPSCs at 80–90% confluence were dissociated and divided into suspensions of ∼4 million cells in low volume aggregation media supplemented with 1:300 Matrigel. They were then incubated overnight on an orbital shaker to generate EBs. Aggregation media contained StemPro-34 media with the addition of 2 mM glutamine, 150 μg/ml transferrin, 50μg/ml ascorbic acid, 50μg/ml monothioglycerol, 1 ng/ml BMP4 and 10 ng/ml rock inhibitor Y-27632. On day 1 of differentiation, a mesoderm-induction medium was used consisting of all of the above in addition to 10 ng/ml BMP4, 8 ng/ml Activin and 5 ng/ml FGF minus Y-27632. On day 3, the medium was changed to StemPro-34 with the addition of 2 mM glutamine, 150 μg/ml transferrin, 50 μg/ml ascorbic acid, 50 μg/ml monothioglycerol, 10 ng/ml VEGF and 1 μM IWP2. For atrial-specific differentiation, 0.75 μM retinoic acid (RA) was administered on days 3–5. On day 5, the culture medium was replaced with CDM3 medium [4], which was refreshed every 4 days. On day 21, beating EBs were collected and enzymatically dissociated with collagenase type 2 for further experimentation.

### Flow-cytometry analysis

To quantify hiPSC cardiomyocyte content and chamber-specific differentiation, we performed flow-cytometry analysis using intracellular staining of cardiac troponin T (cTnT) and myosin light chain 2 ventricle (MLC-2v). To this end, hiPSC differentiated cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with 90% methanol in PBS (20 min on ice) and washed with PBS containing 0.5% BSA (Sigma). Cells were then stained overnight (4 °C) with the unconjugated primary antibodies targeting cTnT (MA5–12960, Thermo-Fisher Scientific) and MLC-2 V (ab79935, Abcam) at 1:500 dilution in flow-cytometry buffer consisting of PBS with 0.5% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco). Cells were washed again with PBS and stained with secondary antibodies (PE anti-rabbit 1:50 MLC2v//Cy5 anti-mouse 1:200 cTnT) diluted in PBS with 5% FCS for 1 h at 4 °C. Flow-cytometry analysis was performed with the LSR FortessaII flow cytometer (BD-Biosciences), and FlowJo software.

### Patch-clamp experiments

Cells were seeded at low-confluence on Matrigel-coated 12 mm glass coverslips and cultured with RPMI/B27 for 7 days. APs and K+ currents were recorded at 7–10 days post-plating with the whole-cell patch clamp technique using the current-clamp and voltage-clamp modes respectively. Experiments were performed with an extracellular solution consisting of (in mmol/L): NaCl-140, KCl-5.4, CaCl2–1.8, MgCl2–1, glucose-10, and HEPES-10 (pH -7.4 with NaOH). The pipette solution consisted of (in mmol/L): KCl-120, MgCl2–1, MgATP-3, HEPES-10 and EGTA-10 (pH -7.2 with KOH). For K+ current recordings, extracellular solution was supplemented with 2 μM nifedipine.

APs were elicited at 1 Hz frequency at 33 °C. For refractory period (RP) measurements, a train of 10 stimuli (S1) was applied at a rate of 1.5 Hz with a current twice above the pacing threshold. This was followed by an extra stimulus (S2) with the S1-S2 coupling interval decreasing in 5 ms decrements. The RP was defined as the shortest coupling interval after which an AP could not be elicited.

Ikr current was elicited in the voltage-clamp mode from a holding potential of -40 mV using 4 s depolarizing steps at voltages between -30 mV and 50 mV in 20 mV increments. Ikr was defined as the E4031 (5 μM) sensitive current at the end of the depolarizing step. IkAch was elicited from a holding potential of -40 mV by applying a 500 ms depolarizing pulse to a voltage of 20 mV followed by a 400 ms hyperpolarizing ramp to −120 mV. IkAch was defined as the carbachol (10 μM) sensitive current at the end of hyperpolarizing ramp. Currents were recorded at room temperature. Data was digitized at 20 KHz and filtered using 5 KHz low-pass filter. Amplification, acquisition and analysis were performed using MultiClamp 700B, Digidata 1440A and pClamp11.

### Generation of hiPSC-derived atrial cells sheets (hiPSC-ACSs)

21–25 days post-differentiation, beating EBs were enzymatically dissociated into single cells using mechanical and enzymatic dissociation (collagenase type 2, 220 units/ml, at room temperature for 14 h). The resulting cells were either re-seeded at low confluence for patch-clamp experiments or immunostaining. Alternatively, hiPSC-derived atrial cells were seeded as 20 microliter drops containing ∼700,000 cells on Matrigel-coated 35 mm plastic dishes. The resulting hiPSC-ACS monolayers were left to attach to the plates overnight and then flooded with 2 ml RPMI/B27.

### Optical mapping

The optical mapping setup consisted of a high speed EMCCD camera (Evolve® 512 Delta, Photometrics, 512 × 512 pixels) mounted on a fluorescent macroscope (MVX10, Olympus) equipped with 0.25 NA 6.3× - 63× (MVPLAPO 1×, Olympus) [30,33]. The default field of view achieved for illumination and imaging by setting the zoom body on 2.5× was 10 mm.

The hiPSC-ACSs were loaded with the voltage sensitive dye FluoVolt diluted 1:1000 in RPMI/B27 culture media at 37 °C for 30 min. The tissues were excited using LEDs (X-Cite® TURBO, Excelitas Technologies) with peak wavelength of 475 and emission was passed through 495 long-pass dichroic mirror and filtered using 525/50 band-pass filter (All from Chroma). Fluorescence was acquired at 4 × 4 binning with 3.847 ms sampling interval (∼260 frames/s).

An IDL-based custom-written software, courtesy of prof. Bum-Rak Choi (Brown university), was used for acquisition and analysis of optical mapping videos as previously described [33]. Analysis included generation of activation and APD80 maps along with calculation of mean APD80 and CV for each specimen. For the generation of activation maps, the local activation time (LAT) at each pixel was defined as the point of the local maximum of the 1st derivative. To derive APD80 maps, APD80 was defined as the time interval between the LAT and the time point of 80% repolarization. Phase mapping analysis was performed using a previously described MATLAB-based custom-written software [30,33]. When analyzing rotors, the singularity point (SP) was defined as the pixel where all AP phases conjoin. The rotor radius, a parameter that is inversely proportional to the rotor's curvature, was defined as the distance from the SP to the wavefront by drawing a perpendicular line to the wavefront adjacent to the SP.

### Electrical stimulation and arrhythmia induction

Electrical stimulation was delivered using custom-made platinum electrodes using a stimulus isolation unit (SIU-102, Warner-instruments). Stimuli consisted of 5 ms pulse at the desired frequency. Arrhythmia induction was achieved by delivering trains of high current pulses with varying frequencies near the tissue's refractory period.

### Immunostaining

The hiPSC-CMs, cultured on 12 mm Matrigel-coated glass coverslips, were fixed using 4% PFA in PBS for 20 min at room temperature, washed three times with PBS, permeabilized with 1% Triton for 10 min, and then blocked with PBS containing 5% horse serum for 1 h. Specimens were then incubated overnight at 4 °C with the primary antibodies targeting sarcomeric α-actinin (1:150, mouse, Sigma-Aldrich, A7811), connexin 40 (Cx40; 1:100, goat, Santa-Cruz, sc-20,466), and MLC-2v (1:150, rabbit, ab79935, Abcam). Specimens were washed three times with PBS and incubated for 1 h with the secondary antibodies. All primary and secondary antibodies were diluted in PBS containing 3% horse-serum and 0.1% Triton. All specimens were also stained with DAPI (1:500) and inspected under a Zeiss LSM-710 laser-scanning confocal microscope.

### Western-blot analysis

Differentiated EBs were lysed with ice-cold RIPA lysis buffer and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). 40 μg of protein from the samples were mixed and resolved in 4× Laemmli Sample Buffer (BioRad) and incubated in room temperature for 30 min before loading on proper polyacrylamide gels (Bio-Rad). The electrophoresed proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes via Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer System (Bio-Rad). The membrane were incubated for 60 min with 3.5% dry milk (Santa Cruz) in Tris-buffered saline (TBST) to block nonspecific binding sites. The membranes were incubated with the primary antibodies at 4 °C. The specific primary antibodies used for detection of antigens of interest: Anti connexin 40 (1:1000 in 5% BSA in TBST, AB1726) and Anti β actin (1:1000 in 5% BSA in TBST, ab8224). Primary antibody incubation followed by HRP-coupled secondary antibodies for 2 h at room temperature (BioRad, 1:5000 in 3.5% milk in TBST). Proteins were revealed with ECL Prime (BioRad) and images were acquired using a LAS4000 Camera (GE Healthcare). For quantitation, band intensities were measured, and densitometry was determined using imageJ.

### Statistical analysis

Summary of the data in each experiment are described in the result section as mean ± standard deviation. In the figures, data are presented in box and whiskers plots (except Figs. 1I, 2B and 5) indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. Each data set was tested for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk normality test and appropriate parametric/non-parametric statistical tests were then performed accordingly. The specific statistical tests used for each experiment are described in the figure legends.Fig. 1Molecular and electrical characterization of hiPSC-atrial and ventricular CMs. [A] Schematic representation of the chamber-specific EB-differentiation protocol. RA was added on days 3–5 to induce atrial differentiations. [B] Summary of flow-cytometry analysis showing the percentages of cTnT+ cells (left) as well as cTnT+ MLC2v + cells (right) in the ventricular and atrial differentiations. n = 12 independent differentiations. [C] Immunostaining of hiPSC-ventricular (upper panel) and atrial (lower panel) CMs for α-actinin and MLC2v. [D] Western blot analysis of Connexin40 in hiPSC-ventricular and atrial CMs (upper panel). Summary of Connexin40 signal intensity (normalized to actin) in hiPSC-atrial and ventricular CMs (n = 5 from two independent differentiations), undifferentiated hiPSC and COS7 cell line (n = 1 each, lower panel). [E] Immunostaining of hiPSC-ventricular (upper panel) and atrial (lower panel) CMs for α-actinin and Connexin40. [F] Representative action potential recording of hiPSC- ventricular and atrial CMs. [G] Summary of APD at 90%,50% and 30% repolarization (left panel) and ratios of both APD30 and APD50 to APD90 (right panel) from hiPSC-ventricular (n = 10 from 3 independent differentiations) and atrial (n = 38 from 5 independent differentiations) CMs. [H] Representative recordings of the inward rectifier acetyl-choline sensitive potassium current density IKACh in hiPSC- ventricular and atrial CMs. IKACh (blue) was calculated by subtracting the current trace following 10 μM carbachol (red) application from the baseline current (black). [I] Summary of the current-voltage relationship of IKACh (n = 4 and 3, respectively, from 2 independent differentiations). Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. The data values in (I) are presented as mean ± SD. Statistical comparison was carried out using paired t-test (B, left panel), Wilcoxon signed-rank test (B, right panel), Mann-Whitney test (G) as well as repeated measurements two-way ANOVA followed by Sidak post-hoc analysis (I). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. White scale bar = 20 μm. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)Fig. 1Fig. 2Patch clamp AP and IKr recordings of SQTS-hiPSC- atrial CMs.[A] Representative voltage-clamp recordings of the E4031-sensitive IKr current from atrial CMs derived from healthy- (upper panel), SQTS- (middle panel) and isogenic-control- (lower panel) hiPSC lines. [B] Summary of current-voltage relationship of IKr in hiPSC-atrial CMs from healthy-control (n = 7), SQTS (n = 5) and isogenic-control (n = 4) cell lines. Black arrow indicates the end-pulse current measured, defined as the mean current at the last 50 ms prior to the end of the voltage step. Data were obtained from 3 independent differentiations. [C] Representative whole-cell patch clamp recordings exhibiting paced APs from healthy-control (upper panel), SQTS (middle panel) and isogenic-control (lower panel) hiPSC-atrial CMs. [D] Summary of measured APD90 values from SQTS- (n = 22 from 3 independent differentiations) and both healthy (n = 38 from 5 independent differentiations) and isogenic (n = 16 from 3 independent differentiations) controls- hiPSC-atrial CMs. [E] Whole-cell patch clamp of atrial-CMs from healthy-control (upper panel), SQTS (middle panel) and isogenic-control (lower panel) subjected to refractory period measurements using S1-S2 protocol (S1 at 1.5 Hz, S2 in 5-ms decrements). RP was defined as the longest coupling interval resulting in failure of AP initiation (dashed lines). [F] Summary of RP values from SQTS- (n = 7 from 4 independent differentiations) and both healthy (n = 10) and isogenic (n = 5) controls- hiPSC-atrial CMs (from 3 independent differentiations each). Scale bar = 2 mm. The data values in (B) are presented as mean ± SD. Experiment's results in (D) and (F) are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. Statistical comparison was carried out using repeated measurements two-way ANOVA (B) as well as one-way ANOVA test (D,F), both followed by Sidak post-hoc analysis. *, † p < 0.05; **, † †p < 0.01; ***,†††p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001.Fig. 2

Molecular and electrical characterization of hiPSC-atrial and ventricular CMs. [A] Schematic representation of the chamber-specific EB-differentiation protocol. RA was added on days 3–5 to induce atrial differentiations. [B] Summary of flow-cytometry analysis showing the percentages of cTnT+ cells (left) as well as cTnT+ MLC2v + cells (right) in the ventricular and atrial differentiations. n = 12 independent differentiations. [C] Immunostaining of hiPSC-ventricular (upper panel) and atrial (lower panel) CMs for α-actinin and MLC2v. [D] Western blot analysis of Connexin40 in hiPSC-ventricular and atrial CMs (upper panel). Summary of Connexin40 signal intensity (normalized to actin) in hiPSC-atrial and ventricular CMs (n = 5 from two independent differentiations), undifferentiated hiPSC and COS7 cell line (n = 1 each, lower panel). [E] Immunostaining of hiPSC-ventricular (upper panel) and atrial (lower panel) CMs for α-actinin and Connexin40. [F] Representative action potential recording of hiPSC- ventricular and atrial CMs. [G] Summary of APD at 90%,50% and 30% repolarization (left panel) and ratios of both APD30 and APD50 to APD90 (right panel) from hiPSC-ventricular (n = 10 from 3 independent differentiations) and atrial (n = 38 from 5 independent differentiations) CMs. [H] Representative recordings of the inward rectifier acetyl-choline sensitive potassium current density IKACh in hiPSC- ventricular and atrial CMs. IKACh (blue) was calculated by subtracting the current trace following 10 μM carbachol (red) application from the baseline current (black). [I] Summary of the current-voltage relationship of IKACh (n = 4 and 3, respectively, from 2 independent differentiations). Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. The data values in (I) are presented as mean ± SD. Statistical comparison was carried out using paired t-test (B, left panel), Wilcoxon signed-rank test (B, right panel), Mann-Whitney test (G) as well as repeated measurements two-way ANOVA followed by Sidak post-hoc analysis (I). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. White scale bar = 20 μm. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Patch clamp AP and IKr recordings of SQTS-hiPSC- atrial CMs.

[A] Representative voltage-clamp recordings of the E4031-sensitive IKr current from atrial CMs derived from healthy- (upper panel), SQTS- (middle panel) and isogenic-control- (lower panel) hiPSC lines. [B] Summary of current-voltage relationship of IKr in hiPSC-atrial CMs from healthy-control (n = 7), SQTS (n = 5) and isogenic-control (n = 4) cell lines. Black arrow indicates the end-pulse current measured, defined as the mean current at the last 50 ms prior to the end of the voltage step. Data were obtained from 3 independent differentiations. [C] Representative whole-cell patch clamp recordings exhibiting paced APs from healthy-control (upper panel), SQTS (middle panel) and isogenic-control (lower panel) hiPSC-atrial CMs. [D] Summary of measured APD90 values from SQTS- (n = 22 from 3 independent differentiations) and both healthy (n = 38 from 5 independent differentiations) and isogenic (n = 16 from 3 independent differentiations) controls- hiPSC-atrial CMs. [E] Whole-cell patch clamp of atrial-CMs from healthy-control (upper panel), SQTS (middle panel) and isogenic-control (lower panel) subjected to refractory period measurements using S1-S2 protocol (S1 at 1.5 Hz, S2 in 5-ms decrements). RP was defined as the longest coupling interval resulting in failure of AP initiation (dashed lines). [F] Summary of RP values from SQTS- (n = 7 from 4 independent differentiations) and both healthy (n = 10) and isogenic (n = 5) controls- hiPSC-atrial CMs (from 3 independent differentiations each). Scale bar = 2 mm. The data values in (B) are presented as mean ± SD. Experiment's results in (D) and (F) are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. Statistical comparison was carried out using repeated measurements two-way ANOVA (B) as well as one-way ANOVA test (D,F), both followed by Sidak post-hoc analysis. *, † p < 0.05; **, † †p < 0.01; ***,†††p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001.

### Results

We utilized a SQTS hiPSC line that was previously derived from a 73-year old female patient diagnosed with the SQTS type 1 (SQTS1) [30]. The SQTS phenotype in this patient results from a heterozygous mutation in the KCNH2 gene leading to single amino acid substitution (N588K) in the S5-pore linker region of hERG encoded potassium channel. Clinically, the patient suffered from frequent atrial and ventricular premature contractions, paroxysmal AF, a QT interval of 270 ms in the ECG, and an extensive family history of sudden cardiac death [25]. We utilized two additional hiPSC lines as controls, one from a healthy unrelated individual [15,34] and the other an isogenic-control of the original SQTS hiPSC line derived using a CRISPR/CAS9 based correction of the N588K mutation [30].

We next coaxed the differentiation of the SQTS and healthy- and isogenic- control hiPSCs lines to derive atrial myocytes using an EB based differentiation protocol [18,21,22], in which the differentiation medium is supplemented with RA on days 3–5 [Fig. 1A]. The differentiation process resulted in development of spontaneous beating EBs in both the ventricular (without RA) and atrial (with RA treatment) differentiation protocols (Supplementary Movie 1). Flow cytometry analysis (Fig. S1) revealed comparable cardiomyocyte differentiation efficacy in both ventricular and atrial differentiation protocols, as can be appreciated by the percentage of cTnT+ cells (67.5 ± 10.5% vs. 72.6 ± 8.1%, p = NS, Fig. 1B). A significant portion of the cTnT− cells (∼17% of the total cell population) were found to be CD90+ fibroblast-like cells, similar to findings from previous studies using the same differentiations protocol [21].

Importantly, in contrast to the ventricular differentiation protocol, RA-based atrial differentiation resulted in a significant reduction in the proportion of hiPSC-CMs expressing the ventricular marker MLC2V (60.8 ± 10.5% vs. 2.9 ± 2.4%, p < 0.0001, Fig. 1B).

Immunostaining studies verified the chamber-specific identity of the hiPSC-derived atrial and ventricular cells (Figs. 1C). Notice, that while the expression of the sarcomeric protein α-actinin was comparable among both conditions, MLC2v was only expressed in hiPSC-CMs obtained using the ventricular differentiation protocol and was absent in the hiPSC-derived atrial cells (Fig. 1C). Moreover, connexin 40 (Cx40), an atrial-specific gap junction protein was present only in the hiPSC-derived atrial but not ventricular cells. This was evident by utilizing anti-Cx40 antibodies in both western blot analysis (Fig. 1D) as well as in the corresponding immunostaining studies, showing the typical gap junction punctuate immunosignal only in the hiPSC-derived atrial cells (Fig. 1E).

As atrial and ventricular cardiomyocytes differ in their cellular electrophysiological properties, we next used the whole-cell patch clamp technique to characterize the two differentiating cell populations (Fig. 1F). In comparison to cardiomyocytes derived using the ventricular differentiation protocol, current-clamp recordings of RA-treated hiPSC-CMs showed APs with a shorter AP duration (APD) at 90%, 50% and 30% of repolarization (Fig. 1G). In addition, the APs from RA-treated hiPSC-CMs had a more triangular shape (Fig. 1F) with steeper repolarization as can be appreciated by the ratio of APD at 50% or 30% repolarization to APD at 90% repolarization (APD50/APD90: 0.58 ± 0.24 vs. 0.78 ± 0.06; APD30/APD90: 0.44 ± 0.21 vs 0.64 ± 0.07, p < 0.001, Fig. 1G).

Utilizing the voltage-clamp mode, we also assessed the presence of atrial specific currents in the differentiating cells, focusing on the atrial-specific acetylcholine-sensitive potassium current (IKACh). Addition of carbachol, a cholinergic agonist, resulted in the development of an inward-rectifier current with a typical current-voltage relationship in the RA-treated hiPSC-CMs, whereas it was nearly absent in the ventricular cells (Figs. 1H-I). Notice for example that at -120 mV, the measured current in the atrial cells was −3.8 ± 2.8 pA/pF whereas it was 0.2 ± 0.1 pA/pF in the differentiating ventricular cells (p < 0.0001, Fig. 1I).

We next continued to assess and compare the electrical properties of atrial cardiomyocytes derived from the SQTS-hiPSCs to atrial cells derived from healthy- and isogenic-corrected control hiPSCs. All three hiPSC lines were differentiated into atrial cardiomyocytes and subjected to routine flow cytometry analysis for cTnT and MLC2v expression. All atrial differentiations resulted in >70% cTnT+ cells with <10% cTnT+/MLC2v+ cardiomyocytes. (Fig. S2). AP recordings of atrial and ventricular hiPSC-CMs from both SQTS- and isogenic-control groups exhibited similar pattern of shorter APD and steeper repolarization in the atrial myocytes (Fig. S3).

The KCNH2 (hERG) gene encodes for the Kv11.1 protein which is an alpha subunit of a potassium channel responsible for the rapid delayed rectifier current IKr. In attempt to assess the effect of N588K mutation on IKr in the hiPSC-derived atrial cells, voltage-clamp experiments were conducted (Fig. 2A). The density of the IKr current was defined as the E4031 sensitive current that was measured during the last 50 ms prior to the end of the voltage step. This current was significantly increased in the SQTS-hiPSC-atrial CMs in comparison to both the healthy and isogenic hiPSC-derived atrial cells (for example at +10 mV: 4.3 ± 2.7 vs. 1.4 ± 1.7 and 0.4 ± 0.2 pA/pF respectively; p < 0.01; Figs. 2A-B).

In order to determine the effects of the increased IKr current in the SQTS hiPSC-derived atrial cells on the resulting atrial AP morphology, current-clamp experiments were conducted on the atrial cells derived from the three groups (Fig. 2C). As expected, the SQTS-hiPSC-atrial cells were characterized by a shortened AP (APD90: 129 ± 42 ms) as compared to both healthy- (219 ± 68 ms, p < 0.0001) and isogenic- (237 ± 56 ms, p < 0.0001) control hiPSC-atrial CMs (Figs. 2C-D).

Finally, to define the effects of the shortened AP on the refractory period (RP), a crucial determinant of arrhythmogenesis, we subjected the atrial cells to a stimulation protocol with 10 consecutive stimuli at 1.5 Hz (S1) followed by a premature stimuli (S2) (Fig. 2E, top). The S1-S2 interval was gradually shortened until loss of capture. We found that SQTS-hiPSC atrial CMs demonstrate a shortened RP (185 ± 6 ms) as compared to both healthy- (330 ± 59 ms, p < 0.01) and isogenic- (355 ± 57 ms, p < 0.01) control atrial myocytes (Figs. 2E-F).

Since atrial arrhythmias in the SQTS are thought to be reentrant in nature and therefore cannot be modeled at the single cell level, we next moved to derive a more relevant model of atrial physiology at the tissue level. To this end, we generated circular (5 mm diameter) hiPSC-derived atrial cell-sheets (hiPSC-ACSs) that were composed from >75% cTnT+ hiPSC-derived atrial cells. The hiPSC-ACSs were loaded with the voltage-sensitive dye FluoVolt and studied with a high resolution optical mapping system [33]. The fluorescence snapshots and the resulting activation maps obtained by optical mapping during spontaneous activity of the hiPSC-ACSs confirmed the development of a functional atrial syncytium, with homogenous propagation of the activation wavefront, originating from a pacemaker site to activate the rest of the tissue (Fig. S4A—B). When compared to cell-sheets derived from hiPSC-ventricular CMs, the hiPSC-ACSs maintained their abbreviated APD (Fig. S4C—D).

We next paced the hiPSC-ACSs at fixed rate of 1.25 Hz using point stimulation, and mapped their electrical activity (Supplementary Movie 2). The optical mapping results allowed detailed analysis of different electrophysiological parameters including construction of APD (Fig. 3A, top-panel) and activation (Fig. 3A, middle-panel) maps, which enabled to quantify changes in the repolarization (APD80, Fig. 3B) and conduction (conduction velocity, CV, Fig. 3C) properties. In a similar manner to the single-cell results, the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs displayed significantly shortened mean APD80 values (83 ± 18 ms) as compared to the corresponding isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs (190 ± 37 ms, p < 0.0001, Fig. 3B). In contrast, no significant differences were noted in the CV values between the SQTS and isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs (6.6 ± 4.5 cm/s vs 5.2 ± 3.2 cm/s, p = 0.25, Fig. 3C). The shortening of APD without a significant change in CV led to shortening of the local tissue wavelength (measured as APD x CV), as depicted in the resulting activation-wave propagation map (Fig. 3A, bottom-panel).Fig. 3Optical mapping of SQTS-hiPSC-atrial cellular sheets.[A] Representative APD80 (upper panel) and activation (middle panel) maps as well as fluorescence snapshots (lower panel) of paced normal electrical propagation of SQTS (left) and isogenic-control- (right) hiPSC-ACS. Isochrones equal 20 ms. Blue arrows indicate wavelength. [B–C] Summary of APD80 and CV values from both SQTS (n = 34 from 7 independent differentiations) and isogenic-control- (n = 18 from 10 independent differentiations) hiPSC-ACSs. Scale bar = 2 mm. Statistical comparison was carried out using Mann-Whitney test (3C) and unpaired t-test (3D). Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. ****p < 0.0001. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)Fig. 3

Optical mapping of SQTS-hiPSC-atrial cellular sheets.

[A] Representative APD80 (upper panel) and activation (middle panel) maps as well as fluorescence snapshots (lower panel) of paced normal electrical propagation of SQTS (left) and isogenic-control- (right) hiPSC-ACS. Isochrones equal 20 ms. Blue arrows indicate wavelength. [B–C] Summary of APD80 and CV values from both SQTS (n = 34 from 7 independent differentiations) and isogenic-control- (n = 18 from 10 independent differentiations) hiPSC-ACSs. Scale bar = 2 mm. Statistical comparison was carried out using Mann-Whitney test (3C) and unpaired t-test (3D). Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. ****p < 0.0001. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

We next evaluated whether the hiPSC-ACSs model can be used to model atrial arrhythmias in the SQTS. To this end, both SQTS and isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs were subjected to programmed electrical stimulation that led to the initiation of re-entrant arrhythmias in the form of spiral-waves (Fig. 4A and supplementary Movie 3). We then characterized and compared the resulting spiral wave biophysical properties (by constructing and analyzing the resulting phase-maps, Fig. 4B) generated in the SQTS and control hiPSC-ACSs. Interestingly, arrhythmias induced in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs were characterized by a higher rotation frequency (shorter arrhythmia cycle length) as compared to the isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs (203 ± 31 ms vs 296 ± 47 ms respectively, p < 0.0001, Fig. 4C). Phase-mapping analysis also revealed a steeper wavefront curvature in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs rotors as compared to the isogenic-control specimens (Figs. 4B,D). This can be appreciated by a decreased core to wavefront distance in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs rotors (1.19 ± 0.09 mm) as compared the isogenic-control specimens (2.04 ± 0.72 mm, p < 0.001, Fig. 4D).Fig. 4Biophysical analysis of spiral-waves induced in SQTS-hiPSC-atrial cellular sheets.[A] Fluorescence snapshots sequence of spiral-waves induced in both SQTS and isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs. [B] Phase maps of arrhythmias presenting rotor activity induced in SQTS and isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs. [C] Summary of arrhythmia cycle length values as calculated for spiral-waves activity induced in both SQTS (n = 18 from 8 independent differentiations) and isogenic-control- (n = 6 from 3 independent differentiations) hiPSC-ACS. [D] Summary of core-to-wavefront distance values as calculated for spiral-waves activity induced in both SQTS (n = 12 from 4 independent differentiations) and isogenic-control- (n = 4 from 3 independent differentiations) hiPSC-ACS. Scale bar = 2 mm. Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. Statistical comparison was carried out using unpaired t-test. ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.Fig. 4

Biophysical analysis of spiral-waves induced in SQTS-hiPSC-atrial cellular sheets.

[A] Fluorescence snapshots sequence of spiral-waves induced in both SQTS and isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs. [B] Phase maps of arrhythmias presenting rotor activity induced in SQTS and isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs. [C] Summary of arrhythmia cycle length values as calculated for spiral-waves activity induced in both SQTS (n = 18 from 8 independent differentiations) and isogenic-control- (n = 6 from 3 independent differentiations) hiPSC-ACS. [D] Summary of core-to-wavefront distance values as calculated for spiral-waves activity induced in both SQTS (n = 12 from 4 independent differentiations) and isogenic-control- (n = 4 from 3 independent differentiations) hiPSC-ACS. Scale bar = 2 mm. Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. Statistical comparison was carried out using unpaired t-test. ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.

Following the establishment of the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs model, which displayed an abnormal electrophysiological phenotype (shortened APD) and altered arrhythmogenic activity (highly stable spiral-waves with increased frequency of rotation and wave-front curvature), we aimed to utilize this model to investigate the effects of different anti-arrhythmic agents. Quinidine, a class 1A anti-arrhythmic agent, is currently used as the drug of choice for SQTS patients. Administration of quinidine led to significant prolongation (doubling) of the mean APD80 in SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs (73 ± 4 ms to 143 ± 22 ms, p < 0.001, Figs. 5A&D). Quinidine also resulted in mild slowing of CV in the tissue (from 7.2 ± 2.9 cm/s to 5.4 ± 1.9 cm/s, p < 0.05, Figs. 5A&E).Fig. 5Drug effect on SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs: repolarization and conduction.[A-C] Representative APD80 (upper panels) and activation (lower panels) maps before and after the application of [A] 10 μM quinidine, [B] 5 μM sotalol and [C] 30 μM vernakalant. Isochrones equal 20 ms. [D-E] Summary of [D] APD80 and [E] conduction velocity (CV) values at baseline (red) and upon treatment (blue) with either 10 μM quinidine, 5 μM sotalol and 30 μM vernakalant (n = 6 per group from 4 independent differentiations). Scale bar = 2 mm. Paired values at baseline and after drug application are presented as individual dots. Statistical comparison was carried out using paired t-test. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.Fig. 5

Drug effect on SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs: repolarization and conduction.

[A-C] Representative APD80 (upper panels) and activation (lower panels) maps before and after the application of [A] 10 μM quinidine, [B] 5 μM sotalol and [C] 30 μM vernakalant. Isochrones equal 20 ms. [D-E] Summary of [D] APD80 and [E] conduction velocity (CV) values at baseline (red) and upon treatment (blue) with either 10 μM quinidine, 5 μM sotalol and 30 μM vernakalant (n = 6 per group from 4 independent differentiations). Scale bar = 2 mm. Paired values at baseline and after drug application are presented as individual dots. Statistical comparison was carried out using paired t-test. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.

Contrary to quinidine, application of sotalol, a class 3 anti-arrhythmic drug, had nearly no effect on both repolarization (APD80: 87 ± 14 ms to 89 ± 12 ms, p = 0.77, Figs. 5B&D) and CV (6.5 ± 5.3 cm/s to 6.1 ± 4.7 cm/s, p = 0.9, Figs. 5B&E) in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs. In marked contrast, application of sotalol to hiPSC-ACSs derived from isogenic-control hiPSC-derived atrial cells achieved significant prolongation of the APD80 (Fig. S5).

Finally, we tested the effect of vernakalant, a novel multi-channel blocker approved in the EU for the treatment of AF. Administration of vernakalant led to a prominent prolongation of APD80 in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs (from 83 ± 21 ms to 129 ± 35 ms, p < 0.01, Figs. 5C&D). Vernakalant application was associated also with some slowing in CV (from 8.5 ± 6.9 cm/s to 6.6 ± 5.1 cm/s, p < 0.05, Fig. 5C&E). Interestingly, the effect of vernakalant on slowing conduction was rate dependent and was significantly magnified, for example, when pacing the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs at 4 Hz as compared to 1 Hz pacing (reduction of ∼34% vs. ∼23%, Fig. S6).

We next assessed the effects of the anti-arrhythmic agents tested on the biophysical properties of rotor activity in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs. Interestingly, application of quinidine or vernakalant (but not sotalol) was able to significantly alter the rotors' biophysical properties in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs (Fig. 6A–C). This was manifested by slowing of the tissue's rate of activation and prolongation of the arrhythmia cycle-length from 203 ± 30 ms to 297 ± 39 ms and 275 ± 31 ms in the quinidine and vernakalant treated tissues, respectively (p < 0.0001, Fig. 6B). Likewise, these two agents were able to increase the rotors' core to wavefront distance (1.19 ± 0.09 mm to 1.84 ± 0.43 and 1.77 ± 0.57 mm, respectively, p < 0.01, Fig. 6C), thereby attenuating the increased curvature observed in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs. In prominent contrast, and in line with its lack of effect on repolarization and conduction, sotalol had no significant effects (p = 0.84 and 0.98, respectively, Fig. 6B–C) on the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs' arrhythmia biophysical properties with a measured mean arrhythmia cycle length of 214 ± 45 ms and mean core to wavefront distance of 1.26 ± 0.07 mm.Fig. 6Effects of anti-arrhythmic drugs on arrhythmia biophysical properties.[A] Representative phase map analysis of arrhythmias induced in SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs at baseline and upon administration of either 10 μM quinidine, 5 μM sotalol and 30 μM vernakalant. The core-to-wavefront distance is indicated in red lines. [B] Summary of arrhythmia cycle length values for SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs at baseline (n = 18 from 8 independent differentiations) and upon administration of either 10 μM quinidine (n = 6), 5 μM sotalol (n = 8) and 30 μM vernakalant (n = 9). All from 4 independent differentiations. [C] Summary of core-to-wavefront distance length values for SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs at baseline (n = 12 from 4 independent differentiations) and upon administration of either 10 μM quinidine (n = 6 from 4 independent differentiations), 5 μM sotalol (n = 6 from 2 independent differentiations) and 30 μM vernakalant (n = 7 from 3 independent differentiations). Scale bar = 2 mm. Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. Statistical analysis was carried out using one-way ANOVA test followed by Sidak post-hoc analysis (6B) and Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn's post-hoc analysis (6C). **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)Fig. 6

Effects of anti-arrhythmic drugs on arrhythmia biophysical properties.

[A] Representative phase map analysis of arrhythmias induced in SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs at baseline and upon administration of either 10 μM quinidine, 5 μM sotalol and 30 μM vernakalant. The core-to-wavefront distance is indicated in red lines. [B] Summary of arrhythmia cycle length values for SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs at baseline (n = 18 from 8 independent differentiations) and upon administration of either 10 μM quinidine (n = 6), 5 μM sotalol (n = 8) and 30 μM vernakalant (n = 9). All from 4 independent differentiations. [C] Summary of core-to-wavefront distance length values for SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs at baseline (n = 12 from 4 independent differentiations) and upon administration of either 10 μM quinidine (n = 6 from 4 independent differentiations), 5 μM sotalol (n = 6 from 2 independent differentiations) and 30 μM vernakalant (n = 7 from 3 independent differentiations). Scale bar = 2 mm. Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. Statistical analysis was carried out using one-way ANOVA test followed by Sidak post-hoc analysis (6B) and Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn's post-hoc analysis (6C). **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

### Atrial-specific differentiation of hiPSCs

We utilized a SQTS hiPSC line that was previously derived from a 73-year old female patient diagnosed with the SQTS type 1 (SQTS1) [30]. The SQTS phenotype in this patient results from a heterozygous mutation in the KCNH2 gene leading to single amino acid substitution (N588K) in the S5-pore linker region of hERG encoded potassium channel. Clinically, the patient suffered from frequent atrial and ventricular premature contractions, paroxysmal AF, a QT interval of 270 ms in the ECG, and an extensive family history of sudden cardiac death [25]. We utilized two additional hiPSC lines as controls, one from a healthy unrelated individual [15,34] and the other an isogenic-control of the original SQTS hiPSC line derived using a CRISPR/CAS9 based correction of the N588K mutation [30].

We next coaxed the differentiation of the SQTS and healthy- and isogenic- control hiPSCs lines to derive atrial myocytes using an EB based differentiation protocol [18,21,22], in which the differentiation medium is supplemented with RA on days 3–5 [Fig. 1A]. The differentiation process resulted in development of spontaneous beating EBs in both the ventricular (without RA) and atrial (with RA treatment) differentiation protocols (Supplementary Movie 1). Flow cytometry analysis (Fig. S1) revealed comparable cardiomyocyte differentiation efficacy in both ventricular and atrial differentiation protocols, as can be appreciated by the percentage of cTnT+ cells (67.5 ± 10.5% vs. 72.6 ± 8.1%, p = NS, Fig. 1B). A significant portion of the cTnT− cells (∼17% of the total cell population) were found to be CD90+ fibroblast-like cells, similar to findings from previous studies using the same differentiations protocol [21].

Importantly, in contrast to the ventricular differentiation protocol, RA-based atrial differentiation resulted in a significant reduction in the proportion of hiPSC-CMs expressing the ventricular marker MLC2V (60.8 ± 10.5% vs. 2.9 ± 2.4%, p < 0.0001, Fig. 1B).

Immunostaining studies verified the chamber-specific identity of the hiPSC-derived atrial and ventricular cells (Figs. 1C). Notice, that while the expression of the sarcomeric protein α-actinin was comparable among both conditions, MLC2v was only expressed in hiPSC-CMs obtained using the ventricular differentiation protocol and was absent in the hiPSC-derived atrial cells (Fig. 1C). Moreover, connexin 40 (Cx40), an atrial-specific gap junction protein was present only in the hiPSC-derived atrial but not ventricular cells. This was evident by utilizing anti-Cx40 antibodies in both western blot analysis (Fig. 1D) as well as in the corresponding immunostaining studies, showing the typical gap junction punctuate immunosignal only in the hiPSC-derived atrial cells (Fig. 1E).

As atrial and ventricular cardiomyocytes differ in their cellular electrophysiological properties, we next used the whole-cell patch clamp technique to characterize the two differentiating cell populations (Fig. 1F). In comparison to cardiomyocytes derived using the ventricular differentiation protocol, current-clamp recordings of RA-treated hiPSC-CMs showed APs with a shorter AP duration (APD) at 90%, 50% and 30% of repolarization (Fig. 1G). In addition, the APs from RA-treated hiPSC-CMs had a more triangular shape (Fig. 1F) with steeper repolarization as can be appreciated by the ratio of APD at 50% or 30% repolarization to APD at 90% repolarization (APD50/APD90: 0.58 ± 0.24 vs. 0.78 ± 0.06; APD30/APD90: 0.44 ± 0.21 vs 0.64 ± 0.07, p < 0.001, Fig. 1G).

Utilizing the voltage-clamp mode, we also assessed the presence of atrial specific currents in the differentiating cells, focusing on the atrial-specific acetylcholine-sensitive potassium current (IKACh). Addition of carbachol, a cholinergic agonist, resulted in the development of an inward-rectifier current with a typical current-voltage relationship in the RA-treated hiPSC-CMs, whereas it was nearly absent in the ventricular cells (Figs. 1H-I). Notice for example that at -120 mV, the measured current in the atrial cells was −3.8 ± 2.8 pA/pF whereas it was 0.2 ± 0.1 pA/pF in the differentiating ventricular cells (p < 0.0001, Fig. 1I).

### Assessing the cellular electrophysiological properties of SQTS-hiPSC-derived atrial cells

We next continued to assess and compare the electrical properties of atrial cardiomyocytes derived from the SQTS-hiPSCs to atrial cells derived from healthy- and isogenic-corrected control hiPSCs. All three hiPSC lines were differentiated into atrial cardiomyocytes and subjected to routine flow cytometry analysis for cTnT and MLC2v expression. All atrial differentiations resulted in >70% cTnT+ cells with <10% cTnT+/MLC2v+ cardiomyocytes. (Fig. S2). AP recordings of atrial and ventricular hiPSC-CMs from both SQTS- and isogenic-control groups exhibited similar pattern of shorter APD and steeper repolarization in the atrial myocytes (Fig. S3).

The KCNH2 (hERG) gene encodes for the Kv11.1 protein which is an alpha subunit of a potassium channel responsible for the rapid delayed rectifier current IKr. In attempt to assess the effect of N588K mutation on IKr in the hiPSC-derived atrial cells, voltage-clamp experiments were conducted (Fig. 2A). The density of the IKr current was defined as the E4031 sensitive current that was measured during the last 50 ms prior to the end of the voltage step. This current was significantly increased in the SQTS-hiPSC-atrial CMs in comparison to both the healthy and isogenic hiPSC-derived atrial cells (for example at +10 mV: 4.3 ± 2.7 vs. 1.4 ± 1.7 and 0.4 ± 0.2 pA/pF respectively; p < 0.01; Figs. 2A-B).

In order to determine the effects of the increased IKr current in the SQTS hiPSC-derived atrial cells on the resulting atrial AP morphology, current-clamp experiments were conducted on the atrial cells derived from the three groups (Fig. 2C). As expected, the SQTS-hiPSC-atrial cells were characterized by a shortened AP (APD90: 129 ± 42 ms) as compared to both healthy- (219 ± 68 ms, p < 0.0001) and isogenic- (237 ± 56 ms, p < 0.0001) control hiPSC-atrial CMs (Figs. 2C-D).

Finally, to define the effects of the shortened AP on the refractory period (RP), a crucial determinant of arrhythmogenesis, we subjected the atrial cells to a stimulation protocol with 10 consecutive stimuli at 1.5 Hz (S1) followed by a premature stimuli (S2) (Fig. 2E, top). The S1-S2 interval was gradually shortened until loss of capture. We found that SQTS-hiPSC atrial CMs demonstrate a shortened RP (185 ± 6 ms) as compared to both healthy- (330 ± 59 ms, p < 0.01) and isogenic- (355 ± 57 ms, p < 0.01) control atrial myocytes (Figs. 2E-F).

### Evaluating the electrophysiological properties and arrhythmogenesis of SQTS-hiPSC derived atrial cell-sheets

Since atrial arrhythmias in the SQTS are thought to be reentrant in nature and therefore cannot be modeled at the single cell level, we next moved to derive a more relevant model of atrial physiology at the tissue level. To this end, we generated circular (5 mm diameter) hiPSC-derived atrial cell-sheets (hiPSC-ACSs) that were composed from >75% cTnT+ hiPSC-derived atrial cells. The hiPSC-ACSs were loaded with the voltage-sensitive dye FluoVolt and studied with a high resolution optical mapping system [33]. The fluorescence snapshots and the resulting activation maps obtained by optical mapping during spontaneous activity of the hiPSC-ACSs confirmed the development of a functional atrial syncytium, with homogenous propagation of the activation wavefront, originating from a pacemaker site to activate the rest of the tissue (Fig. S4A—B). When compared to cell-sheets derived from hiPSC-ventricular CMs, the hiPSC-ACSs maintained their abbreviated APD (Fig. S4C—D).

We next paced the hiPSC-ACSs at fixed rate of 1.25 Hz using point stimulation, and mapped their electrical activity (Supplementary Movie 2). The optical mapping results allowed detailed analysis of different electrophysiological parameters including construction of APD (Fig. 3A, top-panel) and activation (Fig. 3A, middle-panel) maps, which enabled to quantify changes in the repolarization (APD80, Fig. 3B) and conduction (conduction velocity, CV, Fig. 3C) properties. In a similar manner to the single-cell results, the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs displayed significantly shortened mean APD80 values (83 ± 18 ms) as compared to the corresponding isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs (190 ± 37 ms, p < 0.0001, Fig. 3B). In contrast, no significant differences were noted in the CV values between the SQTS and isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs (6.6 ± 4.5 cm/s vs 5.2 ± 3.2 cm/s, p = 0.25, Fig. 3C). The shortening of APD without a significant change in CV led to shortening of the local tissue wavelength (measured as APD x CV), as depicted in the resulting activation-wave propagation map (Fig. 3A, bottom-panel).Fig. 3Optical mapping of SQTS-hiPSC-atrial cellular sheets.[A] Representative APD80 (upper panel) and activation (middle panel) maps as well as fluorescence snapshots (lower panel) of paced normal electrical propagation of SQTS (left) and isogenic-control- (right) hiPSC-ACS. Isochrones equal 20 ms. Blue arrows indicate wavelength. [B–C] Summary of APD80 and CV values from both SQTS (n = 34 from 7 independent differentiations) and isogenic-control- (n = 18 from 10 independent differentiations) hiPSC-ACSs. Scale bar = 2 mm. Statistical comparison was carried out using Mann-Whitney test (3C) and unpaired t-test (3D). Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. ****p < 0.0001. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)Fig. 3

Optical mapping of SQTS-hiPSC-atrial cellular sheets.

[A] Representative APD80 (upper panel) and activation (middle panel) maps as well as fluorescence snapshots (lower panel) of paced normal electrical propagation of SQTS (left) and isogenic-control- (right) hiPSC-ACS. Isochrones equal 20 ms. Blue arrows indicate wavelength. [B–C] Summary of APD80 and CV values from both SQTS (n = 34 from 7 independent differentiations) and isogenic-control- (n = 18 from 10 independent differentiations) hiPSC-ACSs. Scale bar = 2 mm. Statistical comparison was carried out using Mann-Whitney test (3C) and unpaired t-test (3D). Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. ****p < 0.0001. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

We next evaluated whether the hiPSC-ACSs model can be used to model atrial arrhythmias in the SQTS. To this end, both SQTS and isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs were subjected to programmed electrical stimulation that led to the initiation of re-entrant arrhythmias in the form of spiral-waves (Fig. 4A and supplementary Movie 3). We then characterized and compared the resulting spiral wave biophysical properties (by constructing and analyzing the resulting phase-maps, Fig. 4B) generated in the SQTS and control hiPSC-ACSs. Interestingly, arrhythmias induced in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs were characterized by a higher rotation frequency (shorter arrhythmia cycle length) as compared to the isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs (203 ± 31 ms vs 296 ± 47 ms respectively, p < 0.0001, Fig. 4C). Phase-mapping analysis also revealed a steeper wavefront curvature in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs rotors as compared to the isogenic-control specimens (Figs. 4B,D). This can be appreciated by a decreased core to wavefront distance in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs rotors (1.19 ± 0.09 mm) as compared the isogenic-control specimens (2.04 ± 0.72 mm, p < 0.001, Fig. 4D).Fig. 4Biophysical analysis of spiral-waves induced in SQTS-hiPSC-atrial cellular sheets.[A] Fluorescence snapshots sequence of spiral-waves induced in both SQTS and isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs. [B] Phase maps of arrhythmias presenting rotor activity induced in SQTS and isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs. [C] Summary of arrhythmia cycle length values as calculated for spiral-waves activity induced in both SQTS (n = 18 from 8 independent differentiations) and isogenic-control- (n = 6 from 3 independent differentiations) hiPSC-ACS. [D] Summary of core-to-wavefront distance values as calculated for spiral-waves activity induced in both SQTS (n = 12 from 4 independent differentiations) and isogenic-control- (n = 4 from 3 independent differentiations) hiPSC-ACS. Scale bar = 2 mm. Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. Statistical comparison was carried out using unpaired t-test. ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.Fig. 4

Biophysical analysis of spiral-waves induced in SQTS-hiPSC-atrial cellular sheets.

[A] Fluorescence snapshots sequence of spiral-waves induced in both SQTS and isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs. [B] Phase maps of arrhythmias presenting rotor activity induced in SQTS and isogenic-control hiPSC-ACSs. [C] Summary of arrhythmia cycle length values as calculated for spiral-waves activity induced in both SQTS (n = 18 from 8 independent differentiations) and isogenic-control- (n = 6 from 3 independent differentiations) hiPSC-ACS. [D] Summary of core-to-wavefront distance values as calculated for spiral-waves activity induced in both SQTS (n = 12 from 4 independent differentiations) and isogenic-control- (n = 4 from 3 independent differentiations) hiPSC-ACS. Scale bar = 2 mm. Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. Statistical comparison was carried out using unpaired t-test. ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.

### Rescuing the abnormal SQTS-hiPSC-atrial phenotype with anti-arrhythmic agents

Following the establishment of the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs model, which displayed an abnormal electrophysiological phenotype (shortened APD) and altered arrhythmogenic activity (highly stable spiral-waves with increased frequency of rotation and wave-front curvature), we aimed to utilize this model to investigate the effects of different anti-arrhythmic agents. Quinidine, a class 1A anti-arrhythmic agent, is currently used as the drug of choice for SQTS patients. Administration of quinidine led to significant prolongation (doubling) of the mean APD80 in SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs (73 ± 4 ms to 143 ± 22 ms, p < 0.001, Figs. 5A&D). Quinidine also resulted in mild slowing of CV in the tissue (from 7.2 ± 2.9 cm/s to 5.4 ± 1.9 cm/s, p < 0.05, Figs. 5A&E).Fig. 5Drug effect on SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs: repolarization and conduction.[A-C] Representative APD80 (upper panels) and activation (lower panels) maps before and after the application of [A] 10 μM quinidine, [B] 5 μM sotalol and [C] 30 μM vernakalant. Isochrones equal 20 ms. [D-E] Summary of [D] APD80 and [E] conduction velocity (CV) values at baseline (red) and upon treatment (blue) with either 10 μM quinidine, 5 μM sotalol and 30 μM vernakalant (n = 6 per group from 4 independent differentiations). Scale bar = 2 mm. Paired values at baseline and after drug application are presented as individual dots. Statistical comparison was carried out using paired t-test. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.Fig. 5

Drug effect on SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs: repolarization and conduction.

[A-C] Representative APD80 (upper panels) and activation (lower panels) maps before and after the application of [A] 10 μM quinidine, [B] 5 μM sotalol and [C] 30 μM vernakalant. Isochrones equal 20 ms. [D-E] Summary of [D] APD80 and [E] conduction velocity (CV) values at baseline (red) and upon treatment (blue) with either 10 μM quinidine, 5 μM sotalol and 30 μM vernakalant (n = 6 per group from 4 independent differentiations). Scale bar = 2 mm. Paired values at baseline and after drug application are presented as individual dots. Statistical comparison was carried out using paired t-test. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.

Contrary to quinidine, application of sotalol, a class 3 anti-arrhythmic drug, had nearly no effect on both repolarization (APD80: 87 ± 14 ms to 89 ± 12 ms, p = 0.77, Figs. 5B&D) and CV (6.5 ± 5.3 cm/s to 6.1 ± 4.7 cm/s, p = 0.9, Figs. 5B&E) in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs. In marked contrast, application of sotalol to hiPSC-ACSs derived from isogenic-control hiPSC-derived atrial cells achieved significant prolongation of the APD80 (Fig. S5).

Finally, we tested the effect of vernakalant, a novel multi-channel blocker approved in the EU for the treatment of AF. Administration of vernakalant led to a prominent prolongation of APD80 in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs (from 83 ± 21 ms to 129 ± 35 ms, p < 0.01, Figs. 5C&D). Vernakalant application was associated also with some slowing in CV (from 8.5 ± 6.9 cm/s to 6.6 ± 5.1 cm/s, p < 0.05, Fig. 5C&E). Interestingly, the effect of vernakalant on slowing conduction was rate dependent and was significantly magnified, for example, when pacing the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs at 4 Hz as compared to 1 Hz pacing (reduction of ∼34% vs. ∼23%, Fig. S6).

### Effects of anti-arrhythmic agents on the atrial arrhythmias' biophysical properties

We next assessed the effects of the anti-arrhythmic agents tested on the biophysical properties of rotor activity in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs. Interestingly, application of quinidine or vernakalant (but not sotalol) was able to significantly alter the rotors' biophysical properties in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs (Fig. 6A–C). This was manifested by slowing of the tissue's rate of activation and prolongation of the arrhythmia cycle-length from 203 ± 30 ms to 297 ± 39 ms and 275 ± 31 ms in the quinidine and vernakalant treated tissues, respectively (p < 0.0001, Fig. 6B). Likewise, these two agents were able to increase the rotors' core to wavefront distance (1.19 ± 0.09 mm to 1.84 ± 0.43 and 1.77 ± 0.57 mm, respectively, p < 0.01, Fig. 6C), thereby attenuating the increased curvature observed in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs. In prominent contrast, and in line with its lack of effect on repolarization and conduction, sotalol had no significant effects (p = 0.84 and 0.98, respectively, Fig. 6B–C) on the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs' arrhythmia biophysical properties with a measured mean arrhythmia cycle length of 214 ± 45 ms and mean core to wavefront distance of 1.26 ± 0.07 mm.Fig. 6Effects of anti-arrhythmic drugs on arrhythmia biophysical properties.[A] Representative phase map analysis of arrhythmias induced in SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs at baseline and upon administration of either 10 μM quinidine, 5 μM sotalol and 30 μM vernakalant. The core-to-wavefront distance is indicated in red lines. [B] Summary of arrhythmia cycle length values for SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs at baseline (n = 18 from 8 independent differentiations) and upon administration of either 10 μM quinidine (n = 6), 5 μM sotalol (n = 8) and 30 μM vernakalant (n = 9). All from 4 independent differentiations. [C] Summary of core-to-wavefront distance length values for SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs at baseline (n = 12 from 4 independent differentiations) and upon administration of either 10 μM quinidine (n = 6 from 4 independent differentiations), 5 μM sotalol (n = 6 from 2 independent differentiations) and 30 μM vernakalant (n = 7 from 3 independent differentiations). Scale bar = 2 mm. Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. Statistical analysis was carried out using one-way ANOVA test followed by Sidak post-hoc analysis (6B) and Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn's post-hoc analysis (6C). **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)Fig. 6

Effects of anti-arrhythmic drugs on arrhythmia biophysical properties.

[A] Representative phase map analysis of arrhythmias induced in SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs at baseline and upon administration of either 10 μM quinidine, 5 μM sotalol and 30 μM vernakalant. The core-to-wavefront distance is indicated in red lines. [B] Summary of arrhythmia cycle length values for SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs at baseline (n = 18 from 8 independent differentiations) and upon administration of either 10 μM quinidine (n = 6), 5 μM sotalol (n = 8) and 30 μM vernakalant (n = 9). All from 4 independent differentiations. [C] Summary of core-to-wavefront distance length values for SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs at baseline (n = 12 from 4 independent differentiations) and upon administration of either 10 μM quinidine (n = 6 from 4 independent differentiations), 5 μM sotalol (n = 6 from 2 independent differentiations) and 30 μM vernakalant (n = 7 from 3 independent differentiations). Scale bar = 2 mm. Experiment's results are summarized in box and whiskers plots indicating the minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile, and maximum as well as the individual values for each data set. Statistical analysis was carried out using one-way ANOVA test followed by Sidak post-hoc analysis (6B) and Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn's post-hoc analysis (6C). **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

### Discussion

While the main attention regarding inherited arrhythmogenic disorders centered on the ventricles, there is a growing interest in identifying and studying genetic causes of atrial arrhythmias. This new interest stems from the realization that there might be an important genetic component in AF pathogenesis. Consequentially, small familial AF and population-based genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have shed light on rare and common variants associated with AF [[35], [36], [37], [38]]. Among the monogenic disorders that are strongly associated with the development of atrial arrhythmias is the SQTS [28,39]. In recent years, a plurality of studies revealed the value of hiPSC modeling in studying several types of inherited ventricular arrhythmias [6,[10], [11], [12], [13], [14],17,40], including the SQTS [[30], [31], [32]]. To demonstrate the utility of hiPSC modeling also for inherited atrial arrhythmias, we chose to establish a patient-specific hiPSC-derived atrial tissue model of the SQTS.

Our results demonstrated the ability to differentiate hiPSC into atrial CMs showing distinct atrial-specific electrical and molecular characteristics. Importantly, the SQTS hiPSC-derived atrial CMs showed pathological electrical features at both the cellular and tissue levels; properties that promoted both the initiation and perpetuation of reentrant atrial arrhythmias. Eventually, the introduction of the anti-arrhythmic agents, quinidine and vernakalant, but not sotalol, was able to alleviate arrhythmogenic features in the SQTS-hiPSC-based atrial tissue model. These results highlight the potential of using patient-specific hiPSC derived atrial cells together with unique tissue models to study atrial arrhythmias mechanisms and treatments.

While most initial stem cell differentiation protocols resulted in a heterogeneous population of CMs with a dominant ventricular phenotype [4,5], recent studies have shown the capability to drive the differentiation of hPSC into enriched populations of cardiomyocyte subtypes including atrial [[18], [19], [20], [21]] and sinus node like pacemaker [41] cells. In line with previous studies, we also utilized RA as the key factor driving the differentiation of hiPSCs towards an atrial fate. The differentiated cardiomyocytes generated using this RA guided differentiation protocol displayed characteristic atrial-specific electrical and molecular properties. For example, the hiPSC-derived atrial myocytes expressed the atrial-specific gap junction protein Cx40, which was not present in the hiPSC-derived ventricular cells. This differential gap junction protein expression pattern, which was verified by flow-cytometry, western blot, and immunostaining, is consistent with the known chamber-specific expression pattern in the native heart [42,43]. Similarly, MLC-2 V, a protein distinctly expressed in native human ventricular myocardium [44], was highly expressed in the hiPSC-derived ventricular cells but was significantly downregulated in the hiPSC-atrial CMs. Finally, atrial CMs are unique also in their electrophysiological signature as they express a specific set of ion-channels [45]. This results in distinct AP properties characterized by short duration, triangular morphology, and a lack of prominent plateau phase [46,47]. Here, consistent with previous reports [[18], [19], [20],24,[48], [49], [50], [51], [52], [53], [54], [55]], both healthy and diseased hiPSC-atrial CMs displayed a similar atrial-specific AP morphology, uniquely expressed atrial-specific ionic currents such as the ACh-sensitive potassium current (IKACh), and showed appropriate responses to atrial-specific pharmacology.

Several channelopathies appear to increase the risk for AF [56], with SQTS patients especially prone to develop atrial arrhythmias. The occurrence of AF is documented in nearly 30% of all SQTS patients [28] and it can be as high as 50% in SQTS1 patients carrying the KCNH2 N588K mutation [39]. Often, AF is the first manifestation of the disease and in some cases can even be the only manifestation. The fact that arrhythmias can develop in both the atria and ventricles in the SQTS1 is not surprising given that the Ikr current plays an important role in shaping AP properties in both chambers. Nevertheless, although the ventricular phenotype of SQTS had been extensively studied [[30], [31], [32],57] there is only paucity of information regarding the impact of similar mutations on the human atrial electrophysiological properties. To address this challenge, we utilized the hiPSC technology to derive a human atrial model of the SQTS. We then studied the disease's electrical characteristics in this model from the ionic current level, through the cellular level to the whole tissue level.

Data from heterologous expression systems [29], in-silico modeling studies [58] and recent hiPSC-derived ventricular CMs models [30,32], demonstrated The N588K mutation in the KCNH2 gene results in significant gain-of-function of the rapid component of the delayed rectifier potassium current (IKr). Consistent with these reports, our voltage-clamp characterization in the SQTS hiPSC-derived atrial cells demonstrated an increased IKr current density.

Evaluating the effects of the augmented IKr current on the cellular electrophysiological properties of the hiPSC-derived atrial cells, we noted significant shortening of APD leading also to abbreviation of the resulting RP. This shortening of both APD and RP is in line with in-silico modeling studies in a SQTS model of the human atrial cardiomyocyte [59] and with a pharmacological model of the SQTS in the canine atria [60]. In the latter model, where the SQTS phenotype was induced by pharmacological augmentation of the IKr current using the specific agonist PD-118057, significant atrial electrophysiological changes were noted manifested by AP shortening, RP abbreviation, along with augmented dispersion of repolarization and increased vulnerability to AF [60]. Finally, our in vitro human atrial CMs studies are also in line with the results of invasive clinical electrophysiological studies performed in SQTS patients revealing a significantly shortened atrial ERP [25]. The shortening of the atrial RP, observed in all aforementioned models, results in a pro-arrhythmic electrical substrate, thought to underlie the increased frequency of atrial arrhythmia in the SQTS patients.

A unique form of re-entry suggested to play a role in driving atrial and ventricular fibrillation in both animal models and humans are rotors [61], manifested in 2D as spiral waves and in 3D as scroll waves. Clinical electrophysiological studies performed in SQTS patients [25] as well as in genetic [57] and drug induced animal [60] demonstrated increased vulnerability to AF. As re-entrant activity occurs at the whole tissue level, the study of arrhythmogenesis in SQTS has been challenging. In our recent work, we studied the arrhythmogenic substrate of the SQTS in a hiPSC derived 2D ventricular tissue model and found an increased propensity for arrhythmias as well as altered arrhythmia properties [30].

Here, we modified this approach and developed a 2D hiPSC-based atrial tissue model of the SQTS. Consistent with our single-cell data, optical mapping evaluations in the resulting SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs revealed significant shortening of the atrial tissues' APD as compared to isogeneic-control hiPSC-ACSs. Reentrant arrhythmias, in the form of spiral waves were easily induced in the hiPSC-ACSs. Detailed phase-mapping analysis of these rotors revealed an accelerated rotation frequency and increased wavefront curvature in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs in comparison to spiral waves induced in the control hiPSC-ACSs, with both of these parameters previously shown to be associated with enhanced arrhythmia stability [62,63]. These results suggest a pro-arrhythmic impact of the N588K mutation on the electrical substrate that may impact both arrhythmia initiation (APD and RP shortening that lead to abbreviation of the tissue wavelength) and arrhythmia perpetuation (altered biophysical properties of the spiral waves generated that may increase their stability).

The treatment of the SQTS usually relies on implantation of an ICD to terminate life-threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias and pharmacology [64]. The favorable strategy for the management of AF in the setting of the SQTS remains unclear. Up until now, quinidine, which is utilized to treat recurrent episodes of ventricular tachyarrhythmia, is also used to treat AF [65]. Recent efforts in the development of AF therapeutics in general have focused on identifying novel anti-arrhythmic agents targeting atrial-specific ionic currents such as IKur and IKACh [66]. We took advantage of our established SQTS-hiPSC-atrial model to evaluate the impact of conventional (quinidine and sotalol) and recently described (vernakalant) anti-arrhythmic compounds. The drug concentrations chosen were based on reported clinically relevant serum concentrations [[67], [68], [69], [70], [71]] as well as previous studies on animal [72] and hiPSC-CMs models [19,22,55]. Our data suggest an anti-arrhythmic effect for both quinidine and vernakalant as both drugs prolonged APD, slightly reduced CV, and slowed down the arrhythmia's rotation frequency while reducing its wavefront curvature. Interestingly, sotalol, which usually directly inhibits IKr, had no significant effect on either of these parameters.

These results are in line with the known quinidine and vernakalant multiple channel blockade actions, as both drugs inhibit INa, a major determinant of cardiac conduction, as well as other potassium currents including the SQTS1-asscoiated IKr, which plays a crucial role in the repolarization of both the atria and the ventricles. Vernakalant effect on sodium channels is known to be frequency dependent [73], meaning that sodium current inhibition is augmented at higher atrial activation rates, as is the case in episodes of AF. This phenomenon, thought to play a part in the drug's selective anti-AF activity, was also evident in our SQTS-hiPSC ACS model. As for sotalol, its ineffectiveness in our model is supported by previous reports indicating that the N588K mutation markedly disrupts the drug's affinity to the KCNH2-encoded channel [28,74].

Our findings on spiral-wave dynamics following drug administration are in agreement with previous simulation studies predicting a deceleration in arrhythmia frequency of rotation upon sodium or potassium channel blockade, as well as reduced spiral-wave curvature following INa inhibition [62,[75], [76], [77]], both eventually leading to arrhythmia destabilization and promoting its termination against unexcitable obstacles in the atria. A recent study in a 2D hESC-atrial sheet model [21] also described similar effects by flecainide, a class 1c anti-arrhythmic agent. The anti-arrhythmic effect of sodium channel blockade on arrhythmogenesis both in vitro and in vivo supports the idea of a potential role of the spiral-wave theory in AF pathogenesis [62]. The spiral-wave theory suggests that INa blockade reduces tissue excitability and interferes with the ability of the propagation of the rotor's wavefront, thus, as observed in our atrial model, destabilizing the arrhythmia and favoring its termination. Taken together, the aforementioned results highlight the ability to utilize the established hiPSC-based atrial arrhythmia model for screening existing and novel anti-arrhythmic agents and for investigating their mechanism of action on both the tissue's basic electrophysiological properties as well as the their impact on modulating the complex biophysical properties of the resulting arrhythmia circuits.

Among the limitations of our model is the relatively immature state of the hiPSC-derived atrial cardiomyocytes, which may express a different profile of ionic currents in terms of kinetics and densities, when compared to adult atrial cardiomyocytes. This may affect different electrophysiological properties of our model at both the cellular and the tissue level. For instance, the relatively slow CV values (∼8 cm/s) observed in the hiPSC-ACSs when compared to adult atrial tissue (∼30–80 cm/s). This slow CV, however, allowed the induction of arrhythmias in the hiPSC-atrial tissues with relatively small dimensions (∼5 mm diameter). Various maturation methods such as hormonal treatment [78], electrical pacing [79] as well as the use of different gel matrices [80] were previously shown to enhance hiPSC-CMs electrical and structural maturity and may be potentially applied in the future to mature hiPSC-derived atrial cells.

Another limitation of our study is the lack of characterization of additional ionic currents such as IK1, which may have significant consequences on the resting membrane potential (RMP) and conduction velocity, particularly as previous work has shown reduced densities of IK1 in myocytes from transgenic SQTS1 rabbits [57]. Such a potential reduction in Ik1 may explain the similar RMP between the SQTS and control hiPSC-derived atrial cells, given the potential contribution of Ikr to the RMP in hiPSC-CMs [81]. Additional studies are warranted to assess the possible remodeling of different ionic currents in atrial models of SQTS1. Finally, while 2D structures, such as our hiPSC-ACS model are easier to study, they lack the complex 3D geometry of the in vivo atria including the naturally occurring anatomical obstacles that may play a crucial role in arrhythmia maintenance or termination.

### Generation of hiPSC-derived atrial CMs

While most initial stem cell differentiation protocols resulted in a heterogeneous population of CMs with a dominant ventricular phenotype [4,5], recent studies have shown the capability to drive the differentiation of hPSC into enriched populations of cardiomyocyte subtypes including atrial [[18], [19], [20], [21]] and sinus node like pacemaker [41] cells. In line with previous studies, we also utilized RA as the key factor driving the differentiation of hiPSCs towards an atrial fate. The differentiated cardiomyocytes generated using this RA guided differentiation protocol displayed characteristic atrial-specific electrical and molecular properties. For example, the hiPSC-derived atrial myocytes expressed the atrial-specific gap junction protein Cx40, which was not present in the hiPSC-derived ventricular cells. This differential gap junction protein expression pattern, which was verified by flow-cytometry, western blot, and immunostaining, is consistent with the known chamber-specific expression pattern in the native heart [42,43]. Similarly, MLC-2 V, a protein distinctly expressed in native human ventricular myocardium [44], was highly expressed in the hiPSC-derived ventricular cells but was significantly downregulated in the hiPSC-atrial CMs. Finally, atrial CMs are unique also in their electrophysiological signature as they express a specific set of ion-channels [45]. This results in distinct AP properties characterized by short duration, triangular morphology, and a lack of prominent plateau phase [46,47]. Here, consistent with previous reports [[18], [19], [20],24,[48], [49], [50], [51], [52], [53], [54], [55]], both healthy and diseased hiPSC-atrial CMs displayed a similar atrial-specific AP morphology, uniquely expressed atrial-specific ionic currents such as the ACh-sensitive potassium current (IKACh), and showed appropriate responses to atrial-specific pharmacology.

### Atrial arrhythmogenic phenotype of the SQTS

Several channelopathies appear to increase the risk for AF [56], with SQTS patients especially prone to develop atrial arrhythmias. The occurrence of AF is documented in nearly 30% of all SQTS patients [28] and it can be as high as 50% in SQTS1 patients carrying the KCNH2 N588K mutation [39]. Often, AF is the first manifestation of the disease and in some cases can even be the only manifestation. The fact that arrhythmias can develop in both the atria and ventricles in the SQTS1 is not surprising given that the Ikr current plays an important role in shaping AP properties in both chambers. Nevertheless, although the ventricular phenotype of SQTS had been extensively studied [[30], [31], [32],57] there is only paucity of information regarding the impact of similar mutations on the human atrial electrophysiological properties. To address this challenge, we utilized the hiPSC technology to derive a human atrial model of the SQTS. We then studied the disease's electrical characteristics in this model from the ionic current level, through the cellular level to the whole tissue level.

Data from heterologous expression systems [29], in-silico modeling studies [58] and recent hiPSC-derived ventricular CMs models [30,32], demonstrated The N588K mutation in the KCNH2 gene results in significant gain-of-function of the rapid component of the delayed rectifier potassium current (IKr). Consistent with these reports, our voltage-clamp characterization in the SQTS hiPSC-derived atrial cells demonstrated an increased IKr current density.

Evaluating the effects of the augmented IKr current on the cellular electrophysiological properties of the hiPSC-derived atrial cells, we noted significant shortening of APD leading also to abbreviation of the resulting RP. This shortening of both APD and RP is in line with in-silico modeling studies in a SQTS model of the human atrial cardiomyocyte [59] and with a pharmacological model of the SQTS in the canine atria [60]. In the latter model, where the SQTS phenotype was induced by pharmacological augmentation of the IKr current using the specific agonist PD-118057, significant atrial electrophysiological changes were noted manifested by AP shortening, RP abbreviation, along with augmented dispersion of repolarization and increased vulnerability to AF [60]. Finally, our in vitro human atrial CMs studies are also in line with the results of invasive clinical electrophysiological studies performed in SQTS patients revealing a significantly shortened atrial ERP [25]. The shortening of the atrial RP, observed in all aforementioned models, results in a pro-arrhythmic electrical substrate, thought to underlie the increased frequency of atrial arrhythmia in the SQTS patients.

### Reentrant arrhythmias in the SQTS hiPSC-ACSs

A unique form of re-entry suggested to play a role in driving atrial and ventricular fibrillation in both animal models and humans are rotors [61], manifested in 2D as spiral waves and in 3D as scroll waves. Clinical electrophysiological studies performed in SQTS patients [25] as well as in genetic [57] and drug induced animal [60] demonstrated increased vulnerability to AF. As re-entrant activity occurs at the whole tissue level, the study of arrhythmogenesis in SQTS has been challenging. In our recent work, we studied the arrhythmogenic substrate of the SQTS in a hiPSC derived 2D ventricular tissue model and found an increased propensity for arrhythmias as well as altered arrhythmia properties [30].

Here, we modified this approach and developed a 2D hiPSC-based atrial tissue model of the SQTS. Consistent with our single-cell data, optical mapping evaluations in the resulting SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs revealed significant shortening of the atrial tissues' APD as compared to isogeneic-control hiPSC-ACSs. Reentrant arrhythmias, in the form of spiral waves were easily induced in the hiPSC-ACSs. Detailed phase-mapping analysis of these rotors revealed an accelerated rotation frequency and increased wavefront curvature in the SQTS-hiPSC-ACSs in comparison to spiral waves induced in the control hiPSC-ACSs, with both of these parameters previously shown to be associated with enhanced arrhythmia stability [62,63]. These results suggest a pro-arrhythmic impact of the N588K mutation on the electrical substrate that may impact both arrhythmia initiation (APD and RP shortening that lead to abbreviation of the tissue wavelength) and arrhythmia perpetuation (altered biophysical properties of the spiral waves generated that may increase their stability).

### Drug treatment of SQTS related atrial arrhythmias

The treatment of the SQTS usually relies on implantation of an ICD to terminate life-threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias and pharmacology [64]. The favorable strategy for the management of AF in the setting of the SQTS remains unclear. Up until now, quinidine, which is utilized to treat recurrent episodes of ventricular tachyarrhythmia, is also used to treat AF [65]. Recent efforts in the development of AF therapeutics in general have focused on identifying novel anti-arrhythmic agents targeting atrial-specific ionic currents such as IKur and IKACh [66]. We took advantage of our established SQTS-hiPSC-atrial model to evaluate the impact of conventional (quinidine and sotalol) and recently described (vernakalant) anti-arrhythmic compounds. The drug concentrations chosen were based on reported clinically relevant serum concentrations [[67], [68], [69], [70], [71]] as well as previous studies on animal [72] and hiPSC-CMs models [19,22,55]. Our data suggest an anti-arrhythmic effect for both quinidine and vernakalant as both drugs prolonged APD, slightly reduced CV, and slowed down the arrhythmia's rotation frequency while reducing its wavefront curvature. Interestingly, sotalol, which usually directly inhibits IKr, had no significant effect on either of these parameters.

These results are in line with the known quinidine and vernakalant multiple channel blockade actions, as both drugs inhibit INa, a major determinant of cardiac conduction, as well as other potassium currents including the SQTS1-asscoiated IKr, which plays a crucial role in the repolarization of both the atria and the ventricles. Vernakalant effect on sodium channels is known to be frequency dependent [73], meaning that sodium current inhibition is augmented at higher atrial activation rates, as is the case in episodes of AF. This phenomenon, thought to play a part in the drug's selective anti-AF activity, was also evident in our SQTS-hiPSC ACS model. As for sotalol, its ineffectiveness in our model is supported by previous reports indicating that the N588K mutation markedly disrupts the drug's affinity to the KCNH2-encoded channel [28,74].

Our findings on spiral-wave dynamics following drug administration are in agreement with previous simulation studies predicting a deceleration in arrhythmia frequency of rotation upon sodium or potassium channel blockade, as well as reduced spiral-wave curvature following INa inhibition [62,[75], [76], [77]], both eventually leading to arrhythmia destabilization and promoting its termination against unexcitable obstacles in the atria. A recent study in a 2D hESC-atrial sheet model [21] also described similar effects by flecainide, a class 1c anti-arrhythmic agent. The anti-arrhythmic effect of sodium channel blockade on arrhythmogenesis both in vitro and in vivo supports the idea of a potential role of the spiral-wave theory in AF pathogenesis [62]. The spiral-wave theory suggests that INa blockade reduces tissue excitability and interferes with the ability of the propagation of the rotor's wavefront, thus, as observed in our atrial model, destabilizing the arrhythmia and favoring its termination. Taken together, the aforementioned results highlight the ability to utilize the established hiPSC-based atrial arrhythmia model for screening existing and novel anti-arrhythmic agents and for investigating their mechanism of action on both the tissue's basic electrophysiological properties as well as the their impact on modulating the complex biophysical properties of the resulting arrhythmia circuits.

Among the limitations of our model is the relatively immature state of the hiPSC-derived atrial cardiomyocytes, which may express a different profile of ionic currents in terms of kinetics and densities, when compared to adult atrial cardiomyocytes. This may affect different electrophysiological properties of our model at both the cellular and the tissue level. For instance, the relatively slow CV values (∼8 cm/s) observed in the hiPSC-ACSs when compared to adult atrial tissue (∼30–80 cm/s). This slow CV, however, allowed the induction of arrhythmias in the hiPSC-atrial tissues with relatively small dimensions (∼5 mm diameter). Various maturation methods such as hormonal treatment [78], electrical pacing [79] as well as the use of different gel matrices [80] were previously shown to enhance hiPSC-CMs electrical and structural maturity and may be potentially applied in the future to mature hiPSC-derived atrial cells.

Another limitation of our study is the lack of characterization of additional ionic currents such as IK1, which may have significant consequences on the resting membrane potential (RMP) and conduction velocity, particularly as previous work has shown reduced densities of IK1 in myocytes from transgenic SQTS1 rabbits [57]. Such a potential reduction in Ik1 may explain the similar RMP between the SQTS and control hiPSC-derived atrial cells, given the potential contribution of Ikr to the RMP in hiPSC-CMs [81]. Additional studies are warranted to assess the possible remodeling of different ionic currents in atrial models of SQTS1. Finally, while 2D structures, such as our hiPSC-ACS model are easier to study, they lack the complex 3D geometry of the in vivo atria including the naturally occurring anatomical obstacles that may play a crucial role in arrhythmia maintenance or termination.

### Conclusions

We established a cellular and tissue-scale hiPSC-based atrial model of the SQTS. The generated models allowed us to characterize the abnormal atrial electrical substrate, at both the single cell and tissue-scale levels, that may promote arrhythmogenesis in the SQTS. These models also allowed us to study the disease's distinctive arrhythmia properties and eventually to test for effective anti-arrhythmic strategies. Moreover, we believe that the utilization of the hiPSC-derived atrial cellular and tissue models can be expanded to study arrhythmogenesis in other inherited or acquired forms of atrial arrhythmias; to screen the effects of existing and novel anti-arrhythmic candidates; and to individualize drug therapy decisions.

The following are the supplementary data related to this article.Video S1Beating embryoid body resulting from the hiPSC chamber-specific ventricular and atrial differentiation protocols.Video S1Video S2Fluorescence movie of normal AP propagation in SQTS- and isogenic control- hiPSC-ACSs.Video S2Video S3Fluorescence (top) and phase (bottom) movies of spiral-waves (rotors) induced in SQTS- and isogenic control- hiPSC-ACSs.Video S3Supplementary materialSupplementary material

Beating embryoid body resulting from the hiPSC chamber-specific ventricular and atrial differentiation protocols.

Fluorescence movie of normal AP propagation in SQTS- and isogenic control- hiPSC-ACSs.

Fluorescence (top) and phase (bottom) movies of spiral-waves (rotors) induced in SQTS- and isogenic control- hiPSC-ACSs.

Supplementary material

### Disclosures

None.

