# MAIN TEXT

## Impacts of gene variants on drug effects-the foundation of genotype-guided pharmacologic therapy for long QT syndrome and short QT syndrome

### Abstract

SummaryThe clinical significance of optimal pharmacotherapy for inherited arrhythmias such as short QT syndrome (SQTS) and long QT syndrome (LQTS) has been increasingly recognised. The advancement of gene technology has opened up new possibilities for identifying genetic variations and investigating the pathophysiological roles and mechanisms of genetic arrhythmias. Numerous variants in various genes have been proven to be causative in genetic arrhythmias. Studies have demonstrated that the effectiveness of certain drugs is specific to the patient or genotype, indicating the important role of gene-variants in drug response. This review aims to summarize the reported data on the impact of different gene-variants on drug response in SQTS and LQTS, as well as discuss the potential mechanisms by which gene-variants alter drug response. These findings may provide valuable information for future studies on the influence of gene variants on drug efficacy and the development of genotype-guided or precision treatment for these diseases.

### Introduction

SQTS and LQTS are congenital heart diseases that increase the risk of ventricular arrhythmia and sudden cardiac death (SCD). The prevalence of LQTS is approximately 1 in 2000 with a higher occurrence in females,1 while the prevalence of SQTS is estimated to be 1 in 5000 to 1 in 1000, with higher occurrence in males.2 Numerous variants in different genes have been identified in patients with LQTS and SQTS. The disease manifestation can vary greatly among patients with different pathogenic gene variants, ranging from asymptomatic to sudden cardiac death (SCD). This variability may be due to incomplete penetrance or the influence of non-genetic factor effects. However, the exact factors that contribute to the heterogeneity in disease presentation are not yet fully understood. In terms of treatment, different approaches, such as implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) and/or pharmacotherapy, can be considered depending on patient's individual situation. Numerous studies have investigated the effects of drugs in LQTS and SQTS, and some drugs have been found to be effective. However, drug efficacy can vary greatly among patients, even among those with the same disease. Interestingly, studies have shown that gene variants can alter the effects of certain drugs.3,4 For example, classical hERG channel-blocking drugs like sotalol have been found to have no beneficial effects in SQTS patients with the N588K variant in the hERG channel.5 This variant has been shown to render the hERG channel resistant to some drugs.4,6,7 Additionally, other gene variants have been reported to impact drug efficacy in patients with genetic arrhythmias. This review will summarise the reported data on drug effects from studies conducted in patients and experimental models of LQTS and SQTS with different gene variants, and will discuss the possible mechanisms through which gene variants affect drug efficacy (see Fig. 1).Fig. 1Diagram illustrating the impact of gene mutations on ion channel function, drug effects, and clinical therapy in LQTS and SQTS. The main genes affected in LQTS and SQTS are the human cardiac KCNH2 and KCNQ1 genes, which encode the hERG and Kv7.1 channels, respectively. Both channels have a pore-forming alpha subunit with 6 transmembrane domains, and a functional channel is composed of 4 alpha subunits. Gain-of-function mutations (shown in red) enhance the outward current, resulting in a shortened duration of action potentials (APD) and QT-interval on the ECG, which can cause arrhythmias. Conversely, loss-of-function mutations (shown in green) reduce the outward current, leading to prolonged APD/QT and subsequent arrhythmias. Importantly, gene mutation-induced changes in the ion channel sequence or structure can affect not only channel gating and function, but also the response to drugs. Therefore, genotype-specific therapy may be necessary for LQTS/SQTS with certain mutations. The red and green mutations shown are examples of mutations in the KCNH2 gene.

Diagram illustrating the impact of gene mutations on ion channel function, drug effects, and clinical therapy in LQTS and SQTS. The main genes affected in LQTS and SQTS are the human cardiac KCNH2 and KCNQ1 genes, which encode the hERG and Kv7.1 channels, respectively. Both channels have a pore-forming alpha subunit with 6 transmembrane domains, and a functional channel is composed of 4 alpha subunits. Gain-of-function mutations (shown in red) enhance the outward current, resulting in a shortened duration of action potentials (APD) and QT-interval on the ECG, which can cause arrhythmias. Conversely, loss-of-function mutations (shown in green) reduce the outward current, leading to prolonged APD/QT and subsequent arrhythmias. Importantly, gene mutation-induced changes in the ion channel sequence or structure can affect not only channel gating and function, but also the response to drugs. Therefore, genotype-specific therapy may be necessary for LQTS/SQTS with certain mutations. The red and green mutations shown are examples of mutations in the KCNH2 gene.

### Short QT syndrome

SQTS was first reported in 2000, when cases were presented with a shortened QT interval and an increased risk of life threatening arrhythmias.8 The clinical symptoms of SQTS include palpitations, syncope, dizziness, and even SCD. SCD commonly occurs in SQTS patients between the ages of 20 and 40.9 The ESC SQTS diagnostic criteria were updated in 2022.10

To date, several genotypes of SQTS have been identified (Table 1).11 SQTS1-3 are associated with dysfunction of potassium channels, including KCNH2 (encoding Kv11.1/hERG/IKr channel, SQTS1), KCNQ1 (encoding Kv7.1/IKs channel, SQTS2) and KCNJ2 (encoding Kir2.1/IK1 channel, SQTS3) channels. SQTS4-6 are linked to dysfunction of calcium channels including CACNA1C (encoding the alpha-subunit of Ca2+ channel, SQTS4), CACNB2 (encoding the beta-subunit of Ca2+ channel, SQTS5), and CACNA2D1 (encoding the alpha2/delta1 subunit of Ca2+ channel, SQTS6) channels. A variant in the cardiac Cl/HCO3 exchanger AE3 gene (SLC4A3) was identified in patients with SQTS.12,13 Recently, Walsh et al. evaluated the validity of genes for SQTS and revealed that the KCNH2 gene was classified as definitive, KCNQ1, KCNJ2 and SLC4A3 were classified as strong to moderate evidence. It is worth noting that, the genetic evidence for SQTS genes was derived from very few variants.14 The evidence for other genes, including SCN5A, CACNA1C, CACNA2D1, and CACNB2, for SQTS susceptibility is disputed.Table 1Genotype and phenotypes of short-QT syndrome (SQTS) and long-QT syndrome (LQTS).DiseasePhenotypeGenotypeAffected current or proteinCharacteristicSQTSSQTS1hERGIKrGain-of-functionSQTS2KCNQ1IKsGain-of-functionSQTS3KCNJ2IK1Gain-of-functionSQTS4CACNB2ICa-LLoss-of-functionSQTS5CACNA1CICa-LLoss-of-functionSQTS6CACNA2D1ICa-LLoss-of-functionSQTS7SCN5AINaLoss-of-functionSQTS8SLC4A3H+/Cl- exchangerLoss-of-functionLQTSLQTS1KCNQ1IKsLoss-of-functionLQTS2hERGIKrLoss-of-functionLQTS3SCN5AINaGain-of-functionLQTS4ANK2 (Ankyrin B)INaGain-of-functionLQTS5KCNE1IKsLoss-of-functionLQTS6KCNE2IKrLoss-of-functionLQTS8CACNA1CICa-LGain-of-functionLQTS9CAV3 (Caveolin)INaGain-of-functionLQTS10SCN4BINaGain-of-functionLQTS11AKAP9 (A anchor protein 9)IKsLoss-of-functionLQTS12SNTA1 (alpha-1 syntrophin)INaGain-of-functionLQTS13KCNJ5IkirLoss-of-functionLQTS14CALM1 (Calmodulin1)Multiple currentsLQTS15CALM2 (Calmodulin2)Multiple currentsLQTS16CALM3 (Calmodulin3)Multiple currentsLQTS17TRDN (Triadin)TriadinLoss-of-function

Genotype and phenotypes of short-QT syndrome (SQTS) and long-QT syndrome (LQTS).

Several variants of KCNH2, including N588K, T618I, R1135H, E50D,15, 16, 17, 18 I560T,19 and S631A20 have been identified in SQTS1 patients. Among them, T618I and N588K are the most common, accounting for 25.9% and 18.5% respectively.21

KCNQ1 variants detected in SQTS2 patients include V307L,22 R295H, F279I,23,24 F279C, V141M and A287T.25 D172N, M301K and E299V variants in KCNJ2 were characterised as variants of SQTS3.26, 27, 28 All of these variants can cause gain-of-function of K+ channels and enhance K+ current, leading to action potential duration (APD)/QTc shortening. Some variants in calcium- and sodium-channel genes have also been detected in patients with SQTS, including CACNA1C-G490R,29
CACNA1C-A39V and CACNA1C -R1937P,29,30
CACNB2-S481L (29), CACNA2D1-S755T,31 and SCN5A-R689H.25,32,33 These variants result in the loss of function of channels and reduce calcium- or sodium-current, which leads to APD/QTc shortening. Recently, a new variant called R370H in the SLC4A3 gene has been identified in two SQTS families12 and SLC4A3 has been described as the SQT8 gene.11 It has been discovered that this variant causes a loss-of-function in the Cl/HCO3-exchanger (AE3) by impairing the trafficking of the exchanger protein to the cell membrane. However, the mechanism by which AE3 dysfunction leads to APD/QT shortening has not yet been clarified.

Since SQTS1 is caused by gain-of-function variants in KCNH2, hERG channel blockers might be useful for treating SQTS1. However, certain hERG-blocking agents such as sotalol and ibutilide, were found to be ineffective in SQTS1 patients.5,15,34 These agents did not prolong the QTc interval or reduce the risk of ventricular tachyarrhythmias. Additionally, the hERG selective blocker E−4031 was found to be less effective at inhibiting the KCNH2–N588K variant compared to WT-channels.35 Subsequent studies revealed that the KCNH2–N588K variant impaired the inactivation of the hERG channel, making it insensitive to blockers. Furthermore, nifekalant,36 bepridil,21 hydroquinidine, flecainide and sotalol37,38 have been tested to assess their differential effects in patients with SQTS1. Bodi et al. conducted a study to examine the effects of two β-blockers on SQTS variants, KCNH2-N588K and KCNQ1-V307L, in CHO-K1 or HEK-293T cells.39 Their findings showed that the KCNH2-N588K and KCNQ1-V307L variants reduced the effects of carvedilol on the tail currents of hERG and Kv7.1 channels, respectively. However, they enhanced the effect of carvedilol on the current at end-pulse and the effect of metoprolol on both tail and end-pulse currents. Carvedilol was able to normalise the QT-interval of SQTS1, but its efficacy was slightly lower in SQTS2. These data suggest that differential effects of β-blockers can be expected in SQTS1 and SQTS2. However, there are currently no relevant clinical data available regarding the efficacy of β-blockers in SQTS patients.

In an experimental study using CHO cells with the N588K and S631A variants in KCNH2, they examined the effects of five anti-arrhythmia drugs: E−4031, amiodarone, quinidine, propafenone, and disopyramide, and found that the potency of these drugs in inhibiting hERG channel currents was differentially effected by both variants,4 suggesting that the variants play a role in drug effects. Another group assessed the antiarrhythmic properties of ranolazine and vernakalant in a pharmacological model of SQTS.40 In this study, they applied pinacidil, an activator of ATP-sensitive potassium channels, to Langendorff-perfused rabbit hearts to induce APD and QT shortening, and programmed stimulation was applied to induce arrhythmias. Both ranolazine and vernakalant have been found to successfully prolong the QT interval and suppress arrhythmias. However, it is important to note that drug-induced SQTS may differ from SQTS caused by gene variants, either in terms of pathogenesis or drug response. Therefore, the data obtained from these studies cannot be directly used to select drugs for SQTS therapy. Fortunately, thanks to the development of human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) techniques, researchers were able to establish the first cellular model of SQTS1 (KCNH2–N588K) using hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) in 2018.41 This breakthrough allowed for further investigations, which revealed that ivabradine, ajmaline, and mexiletine but not flecainide, ranolazine, or amiodarone could prolong APD and reduce arrhythmic events. Therefore, these drugs may be potential candidates for treating or preventing ventricular tachyarrhythmias in individuals with SQTS1 carrying the KCNH2–N588K variant.6,7 Other studies have shown that quinidine, disopyramide,42,43,44 vernakalant,45 but not sotalol, could prolong APD or suppress arrhythmia in hiPSC-CMs from an SQTS1-patient carrying KCNH2–N588K. These findings suggest that KCNH2–N588K may have different effects on drug responses, which could help explain why SQTS patients with KCNH2–N588K have varying responses to hERG channel blockers. Additionally, a computational framework was used to evaluate the drug effects of SQTS1, revealing that quinidine and ivabradine were more effective than ajmaline and mexiletine.46 It is worth noting that the computational analysis of drug effects relies on experimental data as its foundation. Moreover, the results obtained from the computational model also need to be confirmed in experimental or clinical studies.

So far, the front-line drug of choice for treating SQTS is quinidine in pharmacotherapy. Different studies have confirmed the efficacy of quinidine in SQTS1 with N588K. Computational modelling was used to assess the efficacy of quinidine in SQTS2.47 Quinidine was found to be effective in treating KCNQ1-V307L, but not in the V141M variant, indicating that quinidine may have limitations in treating SQTS with certain variants. Luo et al. discovered that high-dose amiodarone is effective for the SQTS2-V307L variant.48 In a patient with SQTS2 carrying KCNQ1-R259H, hydroquinidine was shown to be an effective medication.38 Additionally, the effective use of taurine-magnesium coordination compound (TMCC) in treating SQTS2 has been reported.49 On SQTS3, several drugs have been tested, mainly in experimental settings. These include quinidine,50 chloroquine,5,51,52 gambogic acid (GA),53 amiodarone,54 disopyramide, E−403155,56 and a traditional Chinese medicine known as styrax.57

Theoretically, the ICa-L agonists could be effective for SQTS4-6. However, there are currently no clinically available selective ICa-L agonists for SQTS. It has been reported that quinidine might be an effective drug for SQTS patients carrying calcium channel gene variants29,58 El-Battrawy et al. illustrated that quinidine and amiodarone prolonged APD in a patient with SQTS overlapped with BrS carrying a variant (c.1439C > T/p. S480L) in CACNB2 using hiPSC-CMs. Only amiodarone exhibited a significant antiarrhythmic effect. Sotalol prolonged APD in healthy cells but not in SQTS cells. Additionally, a PI3K activator prolonged APD and reduced arrhythmic events in hiPSC-CMs with the CACNB2-S480L variant.59 In hiPSC-CMs with another variant (p.S142F) in CACNB2, both quinidine and bisoprolol reduced arrhythmic events, while carbachol increased them.60,61 These data suggest that CACNB2 variants can also impact drug effects.

Currently, there is insufficient data regarding pharmacological studies on SQTS with different gene variants. Therefore, further research on the drug effects for SQTS needs to be conducted through in vivo and in vitro experiments. The drugs tested in patients and in SQT-models are summarised in Table 2.Table 2Summary of tested drugs in short-QT syndrome.Clinical studiesSubtypesCasesGeneMutationIonic current affectedEffect on currentDrugsMain resultsReferencesSQTS16KCNH2N588KIkr↑Hydroquinidine (+)Flecainide (−)Sotalol (−)Ibutilide (−)quinidine but not flecainide, sotalol, ibutilide prolonged QTc53KCNH2N588KIkr↑Sotalol (−)The mutation dramatically increased IKr and reduced the affinity of the channel to sotalol.343KCNH2N588KIkr↑Quinidine (+)Quinidine prolonged the QT interval into the normal range and restored the heart rate dependence of the QT interval toward a range of adaptation reported for normal subjects.381KCNH2N588KIkr↑Nifekalant (+)nifekalant prolonged effective refractory period at multiple ventricular sites as well as the QT/QTc interval (from 260/300 to 364/419 ms) on the surface ECG.363KCNH2T618IIkr↑Hydroquinidine (+)Sotalol (−)quinidine but not sotalol prolonged QTc3718KCNH2T618IIkr↑Quinidine (+)Bepridil (+)Quinidine with adequate plasma levels was effective in prolonging QTc intervals among 5 cases, but 3 cases still had premature ventricular contraction or non-sustained ventricular tachycardia. Bepridil successfully prevented ventricular fibrillation in 1 case with 19-ms prolongation of the QTc interval.16,21SQTS21KCNQ1R259HIks↑Hydroquinidine (+)quinidine prolonged QT50SQTS31KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Hydroquinidine (+)quinidine prolonged QT50SQTS41CACNA1CG490RICaL↓Hydroquinidine (+)quinidine prolonged QT58SQTS51CACNB2BC1422TICaL↓Hydroquinidine (+)quinidine prolonged QT58Experimental studiesModelsType of SQTSGeneSite-directed mutagenesisIonic current affectedEffect on currentDrugsMain resultsReferencesSQTS3KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Chloroquine (+)Chloroquine but not quinidine terminates IK1-mediated tachyarrhythmiasin the mouse heart51RabbitSQTS1Ranolazine (+)Vernakalant (+)ranolazine or vernakalant led to a significant suppression of VF40Guinea pigSQTS2TMCC(+)TMCC reversed pinacidil-and trapidil-induced APD shortening.49HEK293SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Quinidine (+)Sotalol (−)The mutation causes a 20-fold increase in IC50 of d-sotalol but only a 5.8-fold increase in IC50 of quinidine.38SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Carvedilol (+)N588K–KCNH2 attenuated carvedilol's inhibition of the IKr tail but enhanced carvedilol's IKr end-pulse inhibition.39SQTS1KCNH2T618IIkr↑Dofetilide (−)Dofitilide failed to inhibit T618I current.21SQTS1KCNH2T618IIkrQuinidien (+)Sotalol (+)Quinidine (5 μM) and sotalol (500 μM) had similar inhibitory effects on steady currents measured at +20 mV in WT and T618I but were less effective in inhibiting tail currents of mutant channels.16SQTS1KCNH2I560TIkr↑Quinidine (+)The I560T mutation exerted only a modest effect on quinidine sensitivity of IhERG:19SQTS2TMCC(+)TMCC reduced Iks.49SQTS3KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Chloroquine (+)Chloroquine inhibited Ik1 stronger than quinidine51Quinidine (+)SQTS3KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Styrax (+)styrax can abolish the inward and outward currents of Kir2.1. The IC50 of styrax for WT, D172N and E299V are similar.57CHOKCNJ2E299VIk1↑Styrax (+)57SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Disopyramide (+)Quinidine (+)E−4031 (−)the N588K-HERG mutation only slightly attenuates I(HERG) blockade by disopyramide (1.5-fold elevation of IC(50)), compared to quinidine (3.5-fold elevation of IC(50)) and E−4031 (11.5-fold elevation of IC(50)).35SQTS1KCNH2N588K/S631AIkr↑Amiodarone (+)Quinidine (+)Disopyramide (+)E−4031 (−)The N588K mutation attenuated I (hERG) inhibition in the following order: E−4031>amiodarone > quinidine > propafenone > disopyramide.4SQTS2KCNQ1V307LIks↑Carvedilol (−)V307L reduced caredilol blockade of Iks.39STQS3KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Chloroquine (+)chloroquine inhibited WT Kir2.1 and D172N-Kir2.1 current.52hiPSC-CMsSQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Ivabradine (+)Ajmaline (+)Mexiletine (+)Flecainide (−)Ranolazine (−)Amiodarone (−)Ivabradine, mexiletine, and ajmaline but not flecainide, ranolazine, or amiodarone prolonged APD and reduced arrhythmic events in hiPSC-CMs6,7SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Quinidine (+)Disopyramide (+)Sotalol (−)Application of quinidine and disopyramide, but not sotalol, normalized APD and suppressed arrhythmia induction.42SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Quinidine (+)Vernakalant (+)Sotalol (−)Both AP shortening and arrhythmia irregularities were reversed by quinidine and vernakalant treatment, but not by sotalol.43SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Disopyramide (+)Disopyramide enhanced ICa-L, late INa and INCX, but reduced ISK, leading to APD-prolongation.44SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Vernakalant (+)Vernakalant failed to suppress the hERG channel currents but reduced the Isk and enhanced INCX and prolonged APD.45SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkrQuinidine (+)Sotalol (−)Metoprolol (−)Quinidine but not sotalol or metoprolol prolonged the action potential duration and abolished arrhythmic activity induced by carbachol.41Computational modellingModelsType of SQTSGeneSite-directed mutagenesisIonic current affectedEffect on currentDrugsMain resultsReferencesComputional modellingSQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Quinidine (+)Ivabradine (+)Ajmaline (+)Mexiletine (+)the modeling detected that quinidine, ivabradine, ajmaline and mexiletine prolonged APD, similar to that detected in hiPSC-CMs.46SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Chloroquine (+)chloroquine prolonged APD and QT interval and declined the T-wave amplitude.56SQTS2KCNQ1V307LV141MIksIks↑↑Quinidine (+)Quinidine (−)Quinidine was effective at terminating arrhythmic excitation waves associated with the V307L but not V141M mutation.47SQTS2KCNQ1V307LIks↑Amiodarone (+)At the cellular level, amiodarone both at low and high doses prolonged the SQT2 AP duration (APD); at the tissue level, amiodarone at a high dose caused QT prolongation to the physiological range.48SQTS3KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Amiodarone (+)Amiodarone increased cellular ERP, prolonged QT interval and decreased the T-wave amplitude.54SQTS3KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Quinidine (+)Disopyramide (+)E−4031 (+)At the single cell level, quinidine, disopyramide and E−4031 prolonged APD. Quinidine exhibited significantly better therapeutic effects on SQT3 than disopyramide and E−4031.55SQTS3KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Chloroquine (+)chloroquine prolonged APD and QT interval and declined the T-wave amplitude.56(+), effective; (−), ineffective; ↑, increase; ↓, decrease.

Summary of tested drugs in short-QT syndrome.

(+), effective; (−), ineffective; ↑, increase; ↓, decrease.

### Genotype-phenotype relation of SQTS

To date, several genotypes of SQTS have been identified (Table 1).11 SQTS1-3 are associated with dysfunction of potassium channels, including KCNH2 (encoding Kv11.1/hERG/IKr channel, SQTS1), KCNQ1 (encoding Kv7.1/IKs channel, SQTS2) and KCNJ2 (encoding Kir2.1/IK1 channel, SQTS3) channels. SQTS4-6 are linked to dysfunction of calcium channels including CACNA1C (encoding the alpha-subunit of Ca2+ channel, SQTS4), CACNB2 (encoding the beta-subunit of Ca2+ channel, SQTS5), and CACNA2D1 (encoding the alpha2/delta1 subunit of Ca2+ channel, SQTS6) channels. A variant in the cardiac Cl/HCO3 exchanger AE3 gene (SLC4A3) was identified in patients with SQTS.12,13 Recently, Walsh et al. evaluated the validity of genes for SQTS and revealed that the KCNH2 gene was classified as definitive, KCNQ1, KCNJ2 and SLC4A3 were classified as strong to moderate evidence. It is worth noting that, the genetic evidence for SQTS genes was derived from very few variants.14 The evidence for other genes, including SCN5A, CACNA1C, CACNA2D1, and CACNB2, for SQTS susceptibility is disputed.Table 1Genotype and phenotypes of short-QT syndrome (SQTS) and long-QT syndrome (LQTS).DiseasePhenotypeGenotypeAffected current or proteinCharacteristicSQTSSQTS1hERGIKrGain-of-functionSQTS2KCNQ1IKsGain-of-functionSQTS3KCNJ2IK1Gain-of-functionSQTS4CACNB2ICa-LLoss-of-functionSQTS5CACNA1CICa-LLoss-of-functionSQTS6CACNA2D1ICa-LLoss-of-functionSQTS7SCN5AINaLoss-of-functionSQTS8SLC4A3H+/Cl- exchangerLoss-of-functionLQTSLQTS1KCNQ1IKsLoss-of-functionLQTS2hERGIKrLoss-of-functionLQTS3SCN5AINaGain-of-functionLQTS4ANK2 (Ankyrin B)INaGain-of-functionLQTS5KCNE1IKsLoss-of-functionLQTS6KCNE2IKrLoss-of-functionLQTS8CACNA1CICa-LGain-of-functionLQTS9CAV3 (Caveolin)INaGain-of-functionLQTS10SCN4BINaGain-of-functionLQTS11AKAP9 (A anchor protein 9)IKsLoss-of-functionLQTS12SNTA1 (alpha-1 syntrophin)INaGain-of-functionLQTS13KCNJ5IkirLoss-of-functionLQTS14CALM1 (Calmodulin1)Multiple currentsLQTS15CALM2 (Calmodulin2)Multiple currentsLQTS16CALM3 (Calmodulin3)Multiple currentsLQTS17TRDN (Triadin)TriadinLoss-of-function

Genotype and phenotypes of short-QT syndrome (SQTS) and long-QT syndrome (LQTS).

Several variants of KCNH2, including N588K, T618I, R1135H, E50D,15, 16, 17, 18 I560T,19 and S631A20 have been identified in SQTS1 patients. Among them, T618I and N588K are the most common, accounting for 25.9% and 18.5% respectively.21

KCNQ1 variants detected in SQTS2 patients include V307L,22 R295H, F279I,23,24 F279C, V141M and A287T.25 D172N, M301K and E299V variants in KCNJ2 were characterised as variants of SQTS3.26, 27, 28 All of these variants can cause gain-of-function of K+ channels and enhance K+ current, leading to action potential duration (APD)/QTc shortening. Some variants in calcium- and sodium-channel genes have also been detected in patients with SQTS, including CACNA1C-G490R,29
CACNA1C-A39V and CACNA1C -R1937P,29,30
CACNB2-S481L (29), CACNA2D1-S755T,31 and SCN5A-R689H.25,32,33 These variants result in the loss of function of channels and reduce calcium- or sodium-current, which leads to APD/QTc shortening. Recently, a new variant called R370H in the SLC4A3 gene has been identified in two SQTS families12 and SLC4A3 has been described as the SQT8 gene.11 It has been discovered that this variant causes a loss-of-function in the Cl/HCO3-exchanger (AE3) by impairing the trafficking of the exchanger protein to the cell membrane. However, the mechanism by which AE3 dysfunction leads to APD/QT shortening has not yet been clarified.

### Drug effects on short QT syndrome

Since SQTS1 is caused by gain-of-function variants in KCNH2, hERG channel blockers might be useful for treating SQTS1. However, certain hERG-blocking agents such as sotalol and ibutilide, were found to be ineffective in SQTS1 patients.5,15,34 These agents did not prolong the QTc interval or reduce the risk of ventricular tachyarrhythmias. Additionally, the hERG selective blocker E−4031 was found to be less effective at inhibiting the KCNH2–N588K variant compared to WT-channels.35 Subsequent studies revealed that the KCNH2–N588K variant impaired the inactivation of the hERG channel, making it insensitive to blockers. Furthermore, nifekalant,36 bepridil,21 hydroquinidine, flecainide and sotalol37,38 have been tested to assess their differential effects in patients with SQTS1. Bodi et al. conducted a study to examine the effects of two β-blockers on SQTS variants, KCNH2-N588K and KCNQ1-V307L, in CHO-K1 or HEK-293T cells.39 Their findings showed that the KCNH2-N588K and KCNQ1-V307L variants reduced the effects of carvedilol on the tail currents of hERG and Kv7.1 channels, respectively. However, they enhanced the effect of carvedilol on the current at end-pulse and the effect of metoprolol on both tail and end-pulse currents. Carvedilol was able to normalise the QT-interval of SQTS1, but its efficacy was slightly lower in SQTS2. These data suggest that differential effects of β-blockers can be expected in SQTS1 and SQTS2. However, there are currently no relevant clinical data available regarding the efficacy of β-blockers in SQTS patients.

In an experimental study using CHO cells with the N588K and S631A variants in KCNH2, they examined the effects of five anti-arrhythmia drugs: E−4031, amiodarone, quinidine, propafenone, and disopyramide, and found that the potency of these drugs in inhibiting hERG channel currents was differentially effected by both variants,4 suggesting that the variants play a role in drug effects. Another group assessed the antiarrhythmic properties of ranolazine and vernakalant in a pharmacological model of SQTS.40 In this study, they applied pinacidil, an activator of ATP-sensitive potassium channels, to Langendorff-perfused rabbit hearts to induce APD and QT shortening, and programmed stimulation was applied to induce arrhythmias. Both ranolazine and vernakalant have been found to successfully prolong the QT interval and suppress arrhythmias. However, it is important to note that drug-induced SQTS may differ from SQTS caused by gene variants, either in terms of pathogenesis or drug response. Therefore, the data obtained from these studies cannot be directly used to select drugs for SQTS therapy. Fortunately, thanks to the development of human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) techniques, researchers were able to establish the first cellular model of SQTS1 (KCNH2–N588K) using hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) in 2018.41 This breakthrough allowed for further investigations, which revealed that ivabradine, ajmaline, and mexiletine but not flecainide, ranolazine, or amiodarone could prolong APD and reduce arrhythmic events. Therefore, these drugs may be potential candidates for treating or preventing ventricular tachyarrhythmias in individuals with SQTS1 carrying the KCNH2–N588K variant.6,7 Other studies have shown that quinidine, disopyramide,42,43,44 vernakalant,45 but not sotalol, could prolong APD or suppress arrhythmia in hiPSC-CMs from an SQTS1-patient carrying KCNH2–N588K. These findings suggest that KCNH2–N588K may have different effects on drug responses, which could help explain why SQTS patients with KCNH2–N588K have varying responses to hERG channel blockers. Additionally, a computational framework was used to evaluate the drug effects of SQTS1, revealing that quinidine and ivabradine were more effective than ajmaline and mexiletine.46 It is worth noting that the computational analysis of drug effects relies on experimental data as its foundation. Moreover, the results obtained from the computational model also need to be confirmed in experimental or clinical studies.

So far, the front-line drug of choice for treating SQTS is quinidine in pharmacotherapy. Different studies have confirmed the efficacy of quinidine in SQTS1 with N588K. Computational modelling was used to assess the efficacy of quinidine in SQTS2.47 Quinidine was found to be effective in treating KCNQ1-V307L, but not in the V141M variant, indicating that quinidine may have limitations in treating SQTS with certain variants. Luo et al. discovered that high-dose amiodarone is effective for the SQTS2-V307L variant.48 In a patient with SQTS2 carrying KCNQ1-R259H, hydroquinidine was shown to be an effective medication.38 Additionally, the effective use of taurine-magnesium coordination compound (TMCC) in treating SQTS2 has been reported.49 On SQTS3, several drugs have been tested, mainly in experimental settings. These include quinidine,50 chloroquine,5,51,52 gambogic acid (GA),53 amiodarone,54 disopyramide, E−403155,56 and a traditional Chinese medicine known as styrax.57

Theoretically, the ICa-L agonists could be effective for SQTS4-6. However, there are currently no clinically available selective ICa-L agonists for SQTS. It has been reported that quinidine might be an effective drug for SQTS patients carrying calcium channel gene variants29,58 El-Battrawy et al. illustrated that quinidine and amiodarone prolonged APD in a patient with SQTS overlapped with BrS carrying a variant (c.1439C > T/p. S480L) in CACNB2 using hiPSC-CMs. Only amiodarone exhibited a significant antiarrhythmic effect. Sotalol prolonged APD in healthy cells but not in SQTS cells. Additionally, a PI3K activator prolonged APD and reduced arrhythmic events in hiPSC-CMs with the CACNB2-S480L variant.59 In hiPSC-CMs with another variant (p.S142F) in CACNB2, both quinidine and bisoprolol reduced arrhythmic events, while carbachol increased them.60,61 These data suggest that CACNB2 variants can also impact drug effects.

Currently, there is insufficient data regarding pharmacological studies on SQTS with different gene variants. Therefore, further research on the drug effects for SQTS needs to be conducted through in vivo and in vitro experiments. The drugs tested in patients and in SQT-models are summarised in Table 2.Table 2Summary of tested drugs in short-QT syndrome.Clinical studiesSubtypesCasesGeneMutationIonic current affectedEffect on currentDrugsMain resultsReferencesSQTS16KCNH2N588KIkr↑Hydroquinidine (+)Flecainide (−)Sotalol (−)Ibutilide (−)quinidine but not flecainide, sotalol, ibutilide prolonged QTc53KCNH2N588KIkr↑Sotalol (−)The mutation dramatically increased IKr and reduced the affinity of the channel to sotalol.343KCNH2N588KIkr↑Quinidine (+)Quinidine prolonged the QT interval into the normal range and restored the heart rate dependence of the QT interval toward a range of adaptation reported for normal subjects.381KCNH2N588KIkr↑Nifekalant (+)nifekalant prolonged effective refractory period at multiple ventricular sites as well as the QT/QTc interval (from 260/300 to 364/419 ms) on the surface ECG.363KCNH2T618IIkr↑Hydroquinidine (+)Sotalol (−)quinidine but not sotalol prolonged QTc3718KCNH2T618IIkr↑Quinidine (+)Bepridil (+)Quinidine with adequate plasma levels was effective in prolonging QTc intervals among 5 cases, but 3 cases still had premature ventricular contraction or non-sustained ventricular tachycardia. Bepridil successfully prevented ventricular fibrillation in 1 case with 19-ms prolongation of the QTc interval.16,21SQTS21KCNQ1R259HIks↑Hydroquinidine (+)quinidine prolonged QT50SQTS31KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Hydroquinidine (+)quinidine prolonged QT50SQTS41CACNA1CG490RICaL↓Hydroquinidine (+)quinidine prolonged QT58SQTS51CACNB2BC1422TICaL↓Hydroquinidine (+)quinidine prolonged QT58Experimental studiesModelsType of SQTSGeneSite-directed mutagenesisIonic current affectedEffect on currentDrugsMain resultsReferencesSQTS3KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Chloroquine (+)Chloroquine but not quinidine terminates IK1-mediated tachyarrhythmiasin the mouse heart51RabbitSQTS1Ranolazine (+)Vernakalant (+)ranolazine or vernakalant led to a significant suppression of VF40Guinea pigSQTS2TMCC(+)TMCC reversed pinacidil-and trapidil-induced APD shortening.49HEK293SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Quinidine (+)Sotalol (−)The mutation causes a 20-fold increase in IC50 of d-sotalol but only a 5.8-fold increase in IC50 of quinidine.38SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Carvedilol (+)N588K–KCNH2 attenuated carvedilol's inhibition of the IKr tail but enhanced carvedilol's IKr end-pulse inhibition.39SQTS1KCNH2T618IIkr↑Dofetilide (−)Dofitilide failed to inhibit T618I current.21SQTS1KCNH2T618IIkrQuinidien (+)Sotalol (+)Quinidine (5 μM) and sotalol (500 μM) had similar inhibitory effects on steady currents measured at +20 mV in WT and T618I but were less effective in inhibiting tail currents of mutant channels.16SQTS1KCNH2I560TIkr↑Quinidine (+)The I560T mutation exerted only a modest effect on quinidine sensitivity of IhERG:19SQTS2TMCC(+)TMCC reduced Iks.49SQTS3KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Chloroquine (+)Chloroquine inhibited Ik1 stronger than quinidine51Quinidine (+)SQTS3KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Styrax (+)styrax can abolish the inward and outward currents of Kir2.1. The IC50 of styrax for WT, D172N and E299V are similar.57CHOKCNJ2E299VIk1↑Styrax (+)57SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Disopyramide (+)Quinidine (+)E−4031 (−)the N588K-HERG mutation only slightly attenuates I(HERG) blockade by disopyramide (1.5-fold elevation of IC(50)), compared to quinidine (3.5-fold elevation of IC(50)) and E−4031 (11.5-fold elevation of IC(50)).35SQTS1KCNH2N588K/S631AIkr↑Amiodarone (+)Quinidine (+)Disopyramide (+)E−4031 (−)The N588K mutation attenuated I (hERG) inhibition in the following order: E−4031>amiodarone > quinidine > propafenone > disopyramide.4SQTS2KCNQ1V307LIks↑Carvedilol (−)V307L reduced caredilol blockade of Iks.39STQS3KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Chloroquine (+)chloroquine inhibited WT Kir2.1 and D172N-Kir2.1 current.52hiPSC-CMsSQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Ivabradine (+)Ajmaline (+)Mexiletine (+)Flecainide (−)Ranolazine (−)Amiodarone (−)Ivabradine, mexiletine, and ajmaline but not flecainide, ranolazine, or amiodarone prolonged APD and reduced arrhythmic events in hiPSC-CMs6,7SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Quinidine (+)Disopyramide (+)Sotalol (−)Application of quinidine and disopyramide, but not sotalol, normalized APD and suppressed arrhythmia induction.42SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Quinidine (+)Vernakalant (+)Sotalol (−)Both AP shortening and arrhythmia irregularities were reversed by quinidine and vernakalant treatment, but not by sotalol.43SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Disopyramide (+)Disopyramide enhanced ICa-L, late INa and INCX, but reduced ISK, leading to APD-prolongation.44SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Vernakalant (+)Vernakalant failed to suppress the hERG channel currents but reduced the Isk and enhanced INCX and prolonged APD.45SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkrQuinidine (+)Sotalol (−)Metoprolol (−)Quinidine but not sotalol or metoprolol prolonged the action potential duration and abolished arrhythmic activity induced by carbachol.41Computational modellingModelsType of SQTSGeneSite-directed mutagenesisIonic current affectedEffect on currentDrugsMain resultsReferencesComputional modellingSQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Quinidine (+)Ivabradine (+)Ajmaline (+)Mexiletine (+)the modeling detected that quinidine, ivabradine, ajmaline and mexiletine prolonged APD, similar to that detected in hiPSC-CMs.46SQTS1KCNH2N588KIkr↑Chloroquine (+)chloroquine prolonged APD and QT interval and declined the T-wave amplitude.56SQTS2KCNQ1V307LV141MIksIks↑↑Quinidine (+)Quinidine (−)Quinidine was effective at terminating arrhythmic excitation waves associated with the V307L but not V141M mutation.47SQTS2KCNQ1V307LIks↑Amiodarone (+)At the cellular level, amiodarone both at low and high doses prolonged the SQT2 AP duration (APD); at the tissue level, amiodarone at a high dose caused QT prolongation to the physiological range.48SQTS3KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Amiodarone (+)Amiodarone increased cellular ERP, prolonged QT interval and decreased the T-wave amplitude.54SQTS3KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Quinidine (+)Disopyramide (+)E−4031 (+)At the single cell level, quinidine, disopyramide and E−4031 prolonged APD. Quinidine exhibited significantly better therapeutic effects on SQT3 than disopyramide and E−4031.55SQTS3KCNJ2D172NIk1↑Chloroquine (+)chloroquine prolonged APD and QT interval and declined the T-wave amplitude.56(+), effective; (−), ineffective; ↑, increase; ↓, decrease.

Summary of tested drugs in short-QT syndrome.

(+), effective; (−), ineffective; ↑, increase; ↓, decrease.

### Long QT syndrome

LQTS, which is defined by the prolongation of the QT interval, was first reported by Jervell and Lange-Nielsen in the 1950s.62 It is a genetic cardiac channelopathy. The ACC/AHA/HRS and ESC guidelines clearly defined the diagnostic criteria for LQTS.10,63

So far 17 subtypes of genetic long QT Syndrome (LQTS) have been described (Table 1), with LQTS1, LQTS2, and LQTS3 being the most common subtypes.64 In further exploration of the correlation between genes and phenotypes of LQTS, KCNQ1, KCNH2, and SCN5A have been classified as definitive evidence for LQTS1-3, respectively. Three calmodulin genes, CALM1 (LQTS14), CALM2 (LQTS15) and CALM3 (LQTS16), as well as TRDN (LQTS17), are classified as definitive/strong evidence subtypes. CACNA1C (LQTS8) was classified as moderate evidence. KCNE1 (LQTS5) and CAV3 (LQTS9) is classified as limited evidence, while KCNE2 (LQTS6), AKAP9 (LQTS11), ANK2 (LQTS4), KCNJ5 (LQTS13), SCN4B (LQTS10) and SNTA1 (LQTS12) are classified as disputed evidence for causality in LQTS. KCNJ2, which was described as LQTS7 gene, is classified as limited evidence for LQTS, but definitive evidence for Anderson-Tawil syndrome.64

LQTS1 is the most common subtype, accounting for 30–35% of individuals with LQTS.65 It is caused by the loss-of-function of KCNQ1 variants.66,67 LQTS2 is the second most common subtype of LQTS and is associated with loss-of-function variants in the KCNH2 gene.68 The characteristic ECG finding of LQTS2 is a notched or bifid T-wave.69 Daily life activities such as sudden startle like from loud noise or emotional stress have been identified as triggers for LQTS2 patient.70 Compared to patients with LQTS1, LQTS2 patients have a higher risk of life-threatening events.

LQTS3 is caused by gain-of-function mutations of SCN5A and accounts for 5–10% of total LQTS cases.65,71 LQTS3 is characterised by a late-onset T-wave,72 which is caused by late sodium channel currents and enhancement of phase 2 of the action potential.

Recently, other rare genotypes of LQTS have been discovered,64 and they also have a high mortality rate. However, there are very few studies on pharmacologic therapy for these genotypes due to their low incidence.

Table 3 shows different drugs tested in LQTS patients with different efficacy. This suggests that the impact of gene variants cannot be excluded, although there may be other factors influencing the efficacy of the drug. Most clinical studies focused on the efficacy of β blockers on LQTS, mainly on LQTS1 and LQTS2. Some experimental studies have examined effects of other drugs, such as bupivacaine (a local anaesthetic), on chromanol 293B-induced LQTS1 and E4031-induced LQTS2-like changes in guinea pig cardiomyocytes,91 NS1643 (an hERG channel activator) on LQTS1 in transgenic rabbits with KV7.1 mutants83 and ranolazine on dofetilide-induced LQTS2 in canines.85 Although these studies observed beneficial effects, they have their limitations, such as drug-induced disease-like changes in animal models, which differ from genetic diseases in humans.Table 3Tested drugs in long-QT syndrome (LQTS).Clinical studiesSubtypesCasesGeneMutationIonic current affectedEffect on currentDrugsMain resultsReferencesLQTS1796959KCNQ1Iks↓Propranolol (+)Nadolol (+)Metoprolol (−)The QTc shortening with propranolol was greater than nadolol and metoprolol. There was a greater risk of BCEs for symptomatic patients initiated on metoprolol compared to propranolol and nadolol.731052072125KCNQ1Iks↓Atenolol (+)Metoprolol (+)Propranolol (+)Nadolol (+)In LQT1, the risk reduction for first cardiac events was similar among the 4 β-blockers, but in LQT2, nadolol provided the only significant risk reduction (hazard ratio: 0.40 [0.16 to 0.98]).74421019KCNQ1Iks↓Bisoprolol (+)Nadolol (+)Atenolol (−)QTc shortening was observed in individuals on bisoprolol and nadolol but not on atenolol.75LQTS2553288KCNH2Ikr↓Propranolol (+)Nadolol (+)Metoprolol (−)The QTc shortening with propranolol was greater than nadolol and metoprolol. There was a greater risk of BCEs for symptomatic patients initiated on metoprolol compared to propranolol and nadolol.7311446100109KCNH2Ikr↓Atenolol (+)Metoprolol (+)Propranolol (+)Nadolol (+)In LQT1, the risk reduction for first cardiac events was similar among the 4 β-blockers, but in LQT2, nadolol provided the only significant risk reduction (hazard ratio: 0.40 [0.16 to 0.98]).7417620KCNH2Ikr↓Bisoprolol (+)Nadolol (+)Atenolol (−)QTc shortening was observed in individuals on bisoprolol and nadolol but not on atenolol.7512KCNH2Ikr↓Mexiletine (+)After mexiletine, the median QTc decreased by 65 ± 45 ms. In 8 patients (67%), the QTc decreased by ≥ 40 ms with a mean decrease in QTc of 91 ms (P < 0.008). For the 11 patients maintained on mexiletine therapy, there have been no breakthrough cardiac events during follow-up.76LQTS32SCN5AV411MINa↑Mexiletine (−)The QTc interval was still longer than 500 ms during follow-up even under oral mexiletine. Case 2 (his aunt) diagnosed as LQT3 suffered from syncope caused by ventricular fibrillation at 35-years-old despite taking mexiletine.7734SCN5AI397F,V411M,L771V,S941NINa↑Mexiletine (+)Mexiletine significantly shortened QTc (by 63 ± 6 ms; p < 0.0001) and reduced the percentage of patients with arrhythmic events (from 22% to 3%; p = 0.031786SCN5ADeltaKPQINa↑Flecainide (+)Flecainide shortened QT, with an adjusted reduction in QTc of −27.1 ms (95% confidence interval: −36.8 ms to −17.4 ms; P < 0.001). Minimal prolongation in QRS occurred (mean: +2.5 ms), and there were no major adverse cardiac effects.798SCN5AD1790GINa↑Flecainide (+)Lidocaine (−)Flecainide shortened QT and also normalized the marked baseline repolarization dispersion in most mutation carriers.805SCN5ADeltaKPQINa↑Ranolazine (+)Ranolazine shortened QTc by 26 ± 3 ms (P < 0.0001) in a concentration-dependent manner. No adverse effects of ranolazine were observed in the study patients.79LQTS81CACNA1CG402S,G406RICaL↑Verapamil (+)Verapamil reduced arrhythmia events and ICD shocks.811CACNA1CG406R,G402SICaL↑Mexiletine (+)QT-interval was shortened on continued anti-arrhythmic treatment with mexiletine, the patient was in stable sinus rhythm and no ventricular arrhythmias occurred.821CACNA1CG406RICaL↑Ranolazine (+)The patient has been completely VT/VF free since ranolazine was added to verapamil.82Experimental studiesType of LQTSGeneSite-directed mutagenesisIonic current affectedEffect on currentDrugsMain resultsReferencesModelsRabbitLQTS1KCNQ1Y315SY315SIks↓NS1643 (+)Docosahexaenac acid (−)In vivo, NS1643 shortened the QTc significantly in LQT1 compared with vehicle. In Langendorff experiments, NS1643 significantly shortened the APD (90) in LQT1 and control rabbits.Docosahexaenoic acid significantly shortened QTc in vivo in WT and LQT2 but not in LQT1 and LQT5 rabbits.83,84LQTS2KCNH2G628SIkr↓Docosahexaenac acid (+)LQTS5KENE1G52RIks↓Docosahexaenac acid (−)CanineLQTS2Ikr↓Ranolazine (+)ranolazine reduced the number of TdP episodes from 10 ± 3 to 3 ± 1 (p < 0.05) and partially reversed the increase of beat-to-beat variability of repolarization with no abbreviation of the dofetilide-induced QT prolongation.85HEK293LQTS3SCN5ADeltaKPQINa↑Flecainide (+)Compared with WT, DeltaKPQ I(Na) was more sensitive to flecainide, and flecainide preferentially inhibited late I(Na) compared with peak I(Na)86LQTS3SCN5AQ1475PMexiletine (+)Phenytoin (+)Mexiletine and phenytoin similarly rescued some of the gating defects. Chronic incubation with mexiletine, but not phenytoin, rescued the Nav1.5-Q1475P trafficking defect, thus increasing mutant channel expression.87hiPSC-CMsLQTS2KCNH2A614VIkr↓Nifedipine (+)Pinacidil (+)Ranolazine (+)Pinacidil and nifedipine shortened APD, abolished EAD and triggered arrhythmias. Ranolazine did not prolong APD but showed antiarrhythmic effects.88LQTS2KCNH2G1681AIkr↓Nicorandil (+)PD118057 (+)Propranolol (+)Nadolol (+)Nicorandil and PD118057 shortened APD and in some cases could abolish EADs. Propranolol and nadolol reversed isoprenaline induced EADs.89LQTS3SCN5AR1644HINa↑Mexiletine (+)Ranolazine (+)Phenytoin (+)Mexiletine, ranolazine and phenytoin shorten APD and field potential durations specifically in LQT3 hiPSC-CMs and antagonized EADs in a dose-dependent manner.90Computational modellingLQTS1KCNQ1Iks↓Bupivacaine (+)the incidence of AP prolongations in the presence of 3 μmol/L bupivacaine was significantly increased from 6% in control myocytes to 24% in LQT1-like but not in LQT2-like myocytes. Computational modeling supported the concept that this bupivacaine-induced the AP prolongations in the control and LQT1-like myocytes were caused by inhibition of hERG channels.91LQTS2KCNH2Ikr↓Bupivacaine (+)(+), effective; (−), ineffective; ↑, increase; ↓, decrease.

Tested drugs in long-QT syndrome (LQTS).

(+), effective; (−), ineffective; ↑, increase; ↓, decrease.

Experimental studies that focus on the effects of drugs on specific gene variants can provide valuable information about how these variants influence the efficacy of the drugs. For instance, there have been studies examining the effects of siRNA on hERG-E637K in HEK cells,92 ranolazine on the KCNH2-A614V variant in hiPSC-CMs from a patient with LQTS2,88 and propranolol, nadolol and potassium channel activators (nicorandil and PD118057) on KCNH2-A561V.89 Positive effects were observed in these studies, but it is important to note that the effects of these drugs on other variants were not explored.

In a recent study, the genotype-specific benefits of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) were demonstrated in rabbits carrying the KCNH2-G628S variant, but not in those carrying the KCNQ1-Y315S or KCNE1-G52R variants, or a combination of KCNH2-G628S + and KCNE1-G52R (79). This indicates that the effects of DHA are dependant on the specific variant present.

Given that LQTS3 is caused by a gain of function in the SCN5A channel, Na+ channel blockers have the potential to be effective treatment options. Schwartz and Mazzanti conducted a study and found that mexiletine not only shortened QTc, but also reduced life-threatening arrhythmic events in LQTS3 patients with SCN5A gene variants, including I397F, V411M, L771V, S941N, P1332L, DelQKP1507–1509, R1623Q, R1626P, R1644H, E1784K, and M1652R.76, 77, 78 They also successfully generated LQTS3-hiPSC-CMs with the SCN5A-R1644H variant and proved that mexiletine effectively in shortened APD and reduced early-after-depolarisation (EADs).90 Therefore, mexiletine may be a promising therapeutic agent for LQTS3. Additionally, it was discovered that flecainide shortened QTc in LQTS3 patients with the SCN5A-ΔKPQ deletion93 or SCN5A-D1790G.80 In vitro studies showed that flecainide has a high affinity for the Nav1.5 channel protein and can improve impaired inactivation caused by the ΔKPQ deletion in HEK293 cells.86 Furthermore, ranolazine,79,94 phenytoin,87 verapamil81 and mexiletine82 have also shown beneficial effects in LQTS3 or LQTS8.

Recently, studies have demonstrated that SGK1 inhibitors can shorten APD in different scenarios. For example, they have been shown to be effective in iPSC-CMs with the SCN5A-N406K variant95 and in dofetilide-treated iPSC-CMs.96 Additionally, SGK1 inhibitors have been found to be effective in cells with LQTS2 variants (KCNH2-p.A561V/p.A614V/p.G628S/IVS9-28 A/G) and LQTS1 variants (KCNQ1-p.R594Q and KCNQ1-p.A341V) but not in cells with the LQTS1 KCNQ1-p.A341V or KCNQ1-p.Y315S variant.97 These findings suggest that SGK1 inhibitors may be potential candidate drugs for treating LQTS, particularly LQTS3, as they can selectively reduce INa-L.95

Furthermore, the effects of SGLT2 inhibitor on INa-L and APD/QT have been described. Empagliflozin, an SGLT2 inhibitor, was shown to reduce INa-L in cardiomyocytes from mice with heart failure and in cells carrying SCN5A-R1623Q or SCN5A-ΔKPQ.98 It also attenuated sotalol-induced QT prolongation99 or amitriptyline-induced QT prolongation in rats.100 In patients treated with SGLT2 inhibitors as an add-on therapy to metformin, the QT interval was found to be shorter compared to patients treated with other glucose-lowering agents.101 These findings support the potential use of SGLT2 inhibitors for the treatment of LQTS3.

While there is limited data on the effects of SGLT2 and SGK1 inhibitors in LQTS patients or models, the study exploring the therapeutic effects of those inhibitors on LQTS may offer a new pharmacotherapy option. Further research in this area is needed to establish the clinical significance of SGLT2 or SGK1 inhibitors in LQTS therapy.

There is limited research on the pharmacological therapy of other rare genotypes of LQTS. The drugs tested in LQTS-patients and models are summarised in Table 3.

### Genotypes of long QT syndrome

So far 17 subtypes of genetic long QT Syndrome (LQTS) have been described (Table 1), with LQTS1, LQTS2, and LQTS3 being the most common subtypes.64 In further exploration of the correlation between genes and phenotypes of LQTS, KCNQ1, KCNH2, and SCN5A have been classified as definitive evidence for LQTS1-3, respectively. Three calmodulin genes, CALM1 (LQTS14), CALM2 (LQTS15) and CALM3 (LQTS16), as well as TRDN (LQTS17), are classified as definitive/strong evidence subtypes. CACNA1C (LQTS8) was classified as moderate evidence. KCNE1 (LQTS5) and CAV3 (LQTS9) is classified as limited evidence, while KCNE2 (LQTS6), AKAP9 (LQTS11), ANK2 (LQTS4), KCNJ5 (LQTS13), SCN4B (LQTS10) and SNTA1 (LQTS12) are classified as disputed evidence for causality in LQTS. KCNJ2, which was described as LQTS7 gene, is classified as limited evidence for LQTS, but definitive evidence for Anderson-Tawil syndrome.64

LQTS1 is the most common subtype, accounting for 30–35% of individuals with LQTS.65 It is caused by the loss-of-function of KCNQ1 variants.66,67 LQTS2 is the second most common subtype of LQTS and is associated with loss-of-function variants in the KCNH2 gene.68 The characteristic ECG finding of LQTS2 is a notched or bifid T-wave.69 Daily life activities such as sudden startle like from loud noise or emotional stress have been identified as triggers for LQTS2 patient.70 Compared to patients with LQTS1, LQTS2 patients have a higher risk of life-threatening events.

LQTS3 is caused by gain-of-function mutations of SCN5A and accounts for 5–10% of total LQTS cases.65,71 LQTS3 is characterised by a late-onset T-wave,72 which is caused by late sodium channel currents and enhancement of phase 2 of the action potential.

Recently, other rare genotypes of LQTS have been discovered,64 and they also have a high mortality rate. However, there are very few studies on pharmacologic therapy for these genotypes due to their low incidence.

### Pharmacological studies on the long QT syndrome

Table 3 shows different drugs tested in LQTS patients with different efficacy. This suggests that the impact of gene variants cannot be excluded, although there may be other factors influencing the efficacy of the drug. Most clinical studies focused on the efficacy of β blockers on LQTS, mainly on LQTS1 and LQTS2. Some experimental studies have examined effects of other drugs, such as bupivacaine (a local anaesthetic), on chromanol 293B-induced LQTS1 and E4031-induced LQTS2-like changes in guinea pig cardiomyocytes,91 NS1643 (an hERG channel activator) on LQTS1 in transgenic rabbits with KV7.1 mutants83 and ranolazine on dofetilide-induced LQTS2 in canines.85 Although these studies observed beneficial effects, they have their limitations, such as drug-induced disease-like changes in animal models, which differ from genetic diseases in humans.Table 3Tested drugs in long-QT syndrome (LQTS).Clinical studiesSubtypesCasesGeneMutationIonic current affectedEffect on currentDrugsMain resultsReferencesLQTS1796959KCNQ1Iks↓Propranolol (+)Nadolol (+)Metoprolol (−)The QTc shortening with propranolol was greater than nadolol and metoprolol. There was a greater risk of BCEs for symptomatic patients initiated on metoprolol compared to propranolol and nadolol.731052072125KCNQ1Iks↓Atenolol (+)Metoprolol (+)Propranolol (+)Nadolol (+)In LQT1, the risk reduction for first cardiac events was similar among the 4 β-blockers, but in LQT2, nadolol provided the only significant risk reduction (hazard ratio: 0.40 [0.16 to 0.98]).74421019KCNQ1Iks↓Bisoprolol (+)Nadolol (+)Atenolol (−)QTc shortening was observed in individuals on bisoprolol and nadolol but not on atenolol.75LQTS2553288KCNH2Ikr↓Propranolol (+)Nadolol (+)Metoprolol (−)The QTc shortening with propranolol was greater than nadolol and metoprolol. There was a greater risk of BCEs for symptomatic patients initiated on metoprolol compared to propranolol and nadolol.7311446100109KCNH2Ikr↓Atenolol (+)Metoprolol (+)Propranolol (+)Nadolol (+)In LQT1, the risk reduction for first cardiac events was similar among the 4 β-blockers, but in LQT2, nadolol provided the only significant risk reduction (hazard ratio: 0.40 [0.16 to 0.98]).7417620KCNH2Ikr↓Bisoprolol (+)Nadolol (+)Atenolol (−)QTc shortening was observed in individuals on bisoprolol and nadolol but not on atenolol.7512KCNH2Ikr↓Mexiletine (+)After mexiletine, the median QTc decreased by 65 ± 45 ms. In 8 patients (67%), the QTc decreased by ≥ 40 ms with a mean decrease in QTc of 91 ms (P < 0.008). For the 11 patients maintained on mexiletine therapy, there have been no breakthrough cardiac events during follow-up.76LQTS32SCN5AV411MINa↑Mexiletine (−)The QTc interval was still longer than 500 ms during follow-up even under oral mexiletine. Case 2 (his aunt) diagnosed as LQT3 suffered from syncope caused by ventricular fibrillation at 35-years-old despite taking mexiletine.7734SCN5AI397F,V411M,L771V,S941NINa↑Mexiletine (+)Mexiletine significantly shortened QTc (by 63 ± 6 ms; p < 0.0001) and reduced the percentage of patients with arrhythmic events (from 22% to 3%; p = 0.031786SCN5ADeltaKPQINa↑Flecainide (+)Flecainide shortened QT, with an adjusted reduction in QTc of −27.1 ms (95% confidence interval: −36.8 ms to −17.4 ms; P < 0.001). Minimal prolongation in QRS occurred (mean: +2.5 ms), and there were no major adverse cardiac effects.798SCN5AD1790GINa↑Flecainide (+)Lidocaine (−)Flecainide shortened QT and also normalized the marked baseline repolarization dispersion in most mutation carriers.805SCN5ADeltaKPQINa↑Ranolazine (+)Ranolazine shortened QTc by 26 ± 3 ms (P < 0.0001) in a concentration-dependent manner. No adverse effects of ranolazine were observed in the study patients.79LQTS81CACNA1CG402S,G406RICaL↑Verapamil (+)Verapamil reduced arrhythmia events and ICD shocks.811CACNA1CG406R,G402SICaL↑Mexiletine (+)QT-interval was shortened on continued anti-arrhythmic treatment with mexiletine, the patient was in stable sinus rhythm and no ventricular arrhythmias occurred.821CACNA1CG406RICaL↑Ranolazine (+)The patient has been completely VT/VF free since ranolazine was added to verapamil.82Experimental studiesType of LQTSGeneSite-directed mutagenesisIonic current affectedEffect on currentDrugsMain resultsReferencesModelsRabbitLQTS1KCNQ1Y315SY315SIks↓NS1643 (+)Docosahexaenac acid (−)In vivo, NS1643 shortened the QTc significantly in LQT1 compared with vehicle. In Langendorff experiments, NS1643 significantly shortened the APD (90) in LQT1 and control rabbits.Docosahexaenoic acid significantly shortened QTc in vivo in WT and LQT2 but not in LQT1 and LQT5 rabbits.83,84LQTS2KCNH2G628SIkr↓Docosahexaenac acid (+)LQTS5KENE1G52RIks↓Docosahexaenac acid (−)CanineLQTS2Ikr↓Ranolazine (+)ranolazine reduced the number of TdP episodes from 10 ± 3 to 3 ± 1 (p < 0.05) and partially reversed the increase of beat-to-beat variability of repolarization with no abbreviation of the dofetilide-induced QT prolongation.85HEK293LQTS3SCN5ADeltaKPQINa↑Flecainide (+)Compared with WT, DeltaKPQ I(Na) was more sensitive to flecainide, and flecainide preferentially inhibited late I(Na) compared with peak I(Na)86LQTS3SCN5AQ1475PMexiletine (+)Phenytoin (+)Mexiletine and phenytoin similarly rescued some of the gating defects. Chronic incubation with mexiletine, but not phenytoin, rescued the Nav1.5-Q1475P trafficking defect, thus increasing mutant channel expression.87hiPSC-CMsLQTS2KCNH2A614VIkr↓Nifedipine (+)Pinacidil (+)Ranolazine (+)Pinacidil and nifedipine shortened APD, abolished EAD and triggered arrhythmias. Ranolazine did not prolong APD but showed antiarrhythmic effects.88LQTS2KCNH2G1681AIkr↓Nicorandil (+)PD118057 (+)Propranolol (+)Nadolol (+)Nicorandil and PD118057 shortened APD and in some cases could abolish EADs. Propranolol and nadolol reversed isoprenaline induced EADs.89LQTS3SCN5AR1644HINa↑Mexiletine (+)Ranolazine (+)Phenytoin (+)Mexiletine, ranolazine and phenytoin shorten APD and field potential durations specifically in LQT3 hiPSC-CMs and antagonized EADs in a dose-dependent manner.90Computational modellingLQTS1KCNQ1Iks↓Bupivacaine (+)the incidence of AP prolongations in the presence of 3 μmol/L bupivacaine was significantly increased from 6% in control myocytes to 24% in LQT1-like but not in LQT2-like myocytes. Computational modeling supported the concept that this bupivacaine-induced the AP prolongations in the control and LQT1-like myocytes were caused by inhibition of hERG channels.91LQTS2KCNH2Ikr↓Bupivacaine (+)(+), effective; (−), ineffective; ↑, increase; ↓, decrease.

Tested drugs in long-QT syndrome (LQTS).

(+), effective; (−), ineffective; ↑, increase; ↓, decrease.

Experimental studies that focus on the effects of drugs on specific gene variants can provide valuable information about how these variants influence the efficacy of the drugs. For instance, there have been studies examining the effects of siRNA on hERG-E637K in HEK cells,92 ranolazine on the KCNH2-A614V variant in hiPSC-CMs from a patient with LQTS2,88 and propranolol, nadolol and potassium channel activators (nicorandil and PD118057) on KCNH2-A561V.89 Positive effects were observed in these studies, but it is important to note that the effects of these drugs on other variants were not explored.

In a recent study, the genotype-specific benefits of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) were demonstrated in rabbits carrying the KCNH2-G628S variant, but not in those carrying the KCNQ1-Y315S or KCNE1-G52R variants, or a combination of KCNH2-G628S + and KCNE1-G52R (79). This indicates that the effects of DHA are dependant on the specific variant present.

Given that LQTS3 is caused by a gain of function in the SCN5A channel, Na+ channel blockers have the potential to be effective treatment options. Schwartz and Mazzanti conducted a study and found that mexiletine not only shortened QTc, but also reduced life-threatening arrhythmic events in LQTS3 patients with SCN5A gene variants, including I397F, V411M, L771V, S941N, P1332L, DelQKP1507–1509, R1623Q, R1626P, R1644H, E1784K, and M1652R.76, 77, 78 They also successfully generated LQTS3-hiPSC-CMs with the SCN5A-R1644H variant and proved that mexiletine effectively in shortened APD and reduced early-after-depolarisation (EADs).90 Therefore, mexiletine may be a promising therapeutic agent for LQTS3. Additionally, it was discovered that flecainide shortened QTc in LQTS3 patients with the SCN5A-ΔKPQ deletion93 or SCN5A-D1790G.80 In vitro studies showed that flecainide has a high affinity for the Nav1.5 channel protein and can improve impaired inactivation caused by the ΔKPQ deletion in HEK293 cells.86 Furthermore, ranolazine,79,94 phenytoin,87 verapamil81 and mexiletine82 have also shown beneficial effects in LQTS3 or LQTS8.

Recently, studies have demonstrated that SGK1 inhibitors can shorten APD in different scenarios. For example, they have been shown to be effective in iPSC-CMs with the SCN5A-N406K variant95 and in dofetilide-treated iPSC-CMs.96 Additionally, SGK1 inhibitors have been found to be effective in cells with LQTS2 variants (KCNH2-p.A561V/p.A614V/p.G628S/IVS9-28 A/G) and LQTS1 variants (KCNQ1-p.R594Q and KCNQ1-p.A341V) but not in cells with the LQTS1 KCNQ1-p.A341V or KCNQ1-p.Y315S variant.97 These findings suggest that SGK1 inhibitors may be potential candidate drugs for treating LQTS, particularly LQTS3, as they can selectively reduce INa-L.95

Furthermore, the effects of SGLT2 inhibitor on INa-L and APD/QT have been described. Empagliflozin, an SGLT2 inhibitor, was shown to reduce INa-L in cardiomyocytes from mice with heart failure and in cells carrying SCN5A-R1623Q or SCN5A-ΔKPQ.98 It also attenuated sotalol-induced QT prolongation99 or amitriptyline-induced QT prolongation in rats.100 In patients treated with SGLT2 inhibitors as an add-on therapy to metformin, the QT interval was found to be shorter compared to patients treated with other glucose-lowering agents.101 These findings support the potential use of SGLT2 inhibitors for the treatment of LQTS3.

While there is limited data on the effects of SGLT2 and SGK1 inhibitors in LQTS patients or models, the study exploring the therapeutic effects of those inhibitors on LQTS may offer a new pharmacotherapy option. Further research in this area is needed to establish the clinical significance of SGLT2 or SGK1 inhibitors in LQTS therapy.

There is limited research on the pharmacological therapy of other rare genotypes of LQTS. The drugs tested in LQTS-patients and models are summarised in Table 3.

### Mechanisms underlying the impact of gene variants on drug effects

The aforementioned clinical and experimental studies have shown that drug effects can vary among patients with different gene variants.

There are two basic processes, namely pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic variation, that can contribute to the variability of drug effects. These processes can be influenced by both genetic and non-genetic factors. This review will primarily discuss the variability of drug effects in relation to ion channel gene variants.

Multiple variants have been identified that interrupt the fast inactivation process of the hERG channel, resulting in reduced effects of drugs e.g. methanesulfonanilides.102,103 One such variant is the KCNH2–N588K missense variant, which is located in the linker between the S5 and S6 segments of the hERG channel. This variant can impair channel inactivation and decrease the channel's affinity for class III antiarrhythmic drugs.

Regarding the mechanism of how channel inactivation influences drug effects, it has been suspected that when a drug like sotalol binds to the channel in its open state,104 the inactivation of the channel can stabilise the drug on its binding site, thereby increasing the drug's affinity. As a result, the inactivation-impairing variant N588K is resistant to sotalol because the defect in inactivation reduces the drug's affinity. This may help us understand why KCNH2–N588K is resistant to class III antiarrhythmic drugs, which depend on inactivation.

Besides, it has been suggested that the fast inactivation process of the hERG channel can cause allosteric changes in the inner mouth region. This in turn facilitates the development of a high affinity binding site for certain drugs.104,105 Several hERG variants, such as N588K, S620T,103 T623A, S624A, V625A, G648A, Y652A, F656A,106 G628C/S631C104 and S631A,107,108 have been tested to determine the relationship between drug potency and inactivation. These amino-acid residues associated with inactivation are located in different regions near or at the extracellular face of the channel: 1) the turret, 2) the domain of the outer mouth of the pore (C-terminal side of the pore loop), and 3) inside the pore loop. It is known that most drugs that block the hERG channel with high affinity access the channel pore cavity from the intracellular side when the channel is open, and the canonical high-affinity drug-binding site largely depends on two aromatic residues (F656 and Y652).106 However, it is unclear how the inactivation, which is dependant on residues near the extracellular face of the channel, affects drug effects occurring in residues in S6 near the intracellular side of the channel pore. The phenomenon that the effect of disopyramide is only slightly reduced by either the N588K or S631A single variant, but significantly attenuated by the double variants, suggests that hERG channel inactivation may involve two synergistic processes, each independently influenced by variants at different sites such as the turret or outer mouth of the pore.

Sodium channel blockers such as mexiletine, flecainide, and ranolazine are potential drugs for treating LQT3 because they can selectively inhibit the late sodium channel current. However, the response of LQT3 patients to these drugs can vary, indicating that the effects of the drugs may depend on genetic variants.

Experimental data (Table 4) on the impact of LQTS3 variants show that different variants can affect sodium channel gating kinetics in different or similar ways.110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122 Additionally, a variant can respond differently or similarly to different drugs. These findings suggest that relying solely on cellular electrophysiological data, such as activation, inactivation and recovery from inactivation, is insufficient to determine specific efficacy of different drugs for different gene variants or to guide personalised therapy.Table 4The impact of long-QT syndrome 3 (LQTS3) variants on sodium channel gating and drug effects.Variant in SCN5AINa–PINa-LActInacRecDrugRefI397FIcLSRS0Mex (+)109V411MIcLS0DcMex (+)109L711V0LSRS0Mex (−)109S941NIcLSRSDcMex (−)110Ic0LSAcMex (−)109P1332LDsLS0DcMex (+)110Ic0LSAcMex (+)109deltaKPQIcRSLSDcMex (+)109Fle (+)86LSDcFle (+)111109R1623Q0RSLS0Mex (+)109DsIcRSRS112R1626PIcRSLS0Mex (+)109Ic0LS0Mex (+)110R1644HIcRSLSDcMex (+)109L1650F0RS0AcMex (+)109M1652R0RSRSAcMex (−)109Ic0RSDcMex (−)110I1771M0RSLS0Mex (−)109E1784KIcRSLSAcMex (+)109N1352SDsIcLSRS0Mex (+)113Y1767CDsIcLS0AcRan(+)114DsIc0RSMex (−)115A1656DDsIcRSLSMex (+)Ran(−)Fle (−)116116116V1763MDsIcRSRSAcMex (+)117L1786QDsIcRSLSFle (+)1181795insDLSAcFle (+)111I1756CAcFle (+)119N406KDsIcLSRS0Mex (+)120F1473CIc0LSAcMex (+)121Ic0LSAcMex (+)Fle (+)Ran(+)122122122Ds, decrease; Ic, increase; RS, rightward shift; LS, leftward shift; 0, no change; Dc, decelerate; Ac, acelerate; (+), effective; (−), no effect; Pl, prolongation, INa-p, peak INa; INa-L, late INa; Act, activation; Inac, inactivation; Rec, recovery; Ref, reference.

The impact of long-QT syndrome 3 (LQTS3) variants on sodium channel gating and drug effects.

Ds, decrease; Ic, increase; RS, rightward shift; LS, leftward shift; 0, no change; Dc, decelerate; Ac, acelerate; (+), effective; (−), no effect; Pl, prolongation, INa-p, peak INa; INa-L, late INa; Act, activation; Inac, inactivation; Rec, recovery; Ref, reference.

Zhu et al. conducted a study to investigate how certain SCN5A variants differentially impacted mexiletine effects.109 Their findings revealed that mexiletine causes changes in the conformation of the voltage-sensing domain (VSD) in Domain-III (DIII) of the cardiac Na+-channel. The DIII-VSD was found to be influenced by various LQTS3 variants, indicating that changes in the DIII-VSD conformation can impact the blocking effect of mexiletine.

The C-type inactivation-deficient variants, S620T and S631A in the hERG channel, reduce verapamil blockage. This suggests that inactivation is crucial for verapamil blockade. Interestingly, the KCNH2-S620T variant decreases verapamil-induced blockage 20 times more than the KCNH2-S631A variant does. It has been suggested that verapamil enters the cell membrane as a neutral form and acts at a site within the pore from the intracellular side, which likely contains the serine at position 620.107 Furthermore, it was observed that KCNH2-S620C, KCNH2-S620T, KCNH2-S631A and KCNH2-S631V significantly increase the half maximum inhibitory concentration (IC50) of dofetilide for blocking the channel. Notably, KCNH2-S620T and KCNH2-S631V have a much stronger impact than KCNH2-S620C and KCNH2-S631A, respectively.103 These findings indicate that both the variant site and the replaced amino acid are important factors affecting the impact on drug effects.

Mikuni et al. discovered that both the F340A and F340C mutants of KCNQ1 reduced the effect of isoflurane. However, KCNQ1-F340A was found to be more effective than KCNQ1-F340C in reducing the isoflurane effect.123 This difference may be attributed to the fact that phenylalanine and alanine are non-polar, while cysteine has an uncharged polar character.

Beside gene variants, there are other factors that can affect the effects of drugs. Abdelsayed et al. demonstrated the combined impact of external triggers and an SCN5A variant on the effects of ranolazine.124 They discovered that both high temperature (41 °C) and high intracellular calcium weakened the effectiveness of ranolazine in reducing SCN5A-E1784K late INa. The fast inactivation kinetics of E1784K were not influenced by temperature, indicating that channel inactivation likely does not contribute to the sensitivity of late INa to temperature. Instead, a structural rearrangement can occur in DIVS4 at high temperature, causing the voltage sensor to a state that can enhance the conductance in E1784K.125 As a result, the blockade of ranolazine is reduced. It is speculated that the SCN5A-E1784K mutation can disrupt either the calcium-dependant or calcium–independent interactions between the DIII-DIV linker and the C-terminal domain resulting in the inhibition of the calcium-dependant facilitation in Nav1.5. This mutation may create a high entropy, unstable structure in the C-terminal domain. When the intracellular calcium level rises, the calcified calmodulin can reduce its affinity for the IQ motif, thereby increasing the entropy of the C-terminal domain.126 The increased entropy caused by calcium-bound calmodulin in the C-terminal domain appears to hinder ranolazine from reaching the inner vestibule of the channel pore.

Galleano investigated the mechanism behind the disruption of channel steady-state inactivation caused by phosphorylation of SCN5A-Y1495.127 Surprisingly, they discovered that the SCN5A-Q1476R mutant did not independently affect channel inactivation, but it enhanced the impairment of steady-state inactivation resulting from phosphorylation at the Y1495 site by promoting the release of the inactivation particle. These findings emphasise that gene variants can greatly strengthen the functional consequences including drug effects of SCN5A phosphorylation. This may have implications for understanding mutational phenotypes and guiding future drug development. Furthermore, it was observed that the PKC activator OAG strongly inhibited the late INa of the mutant (Y1795C, Y1795H, and DeltaKPQ) but not the WT channels.128 The effect of OAG on late INa was reduced by the PKC inhibitor staurosporine, eliminated by the S1503A variant, and replicated by the S1503D variant. This suggests that S1503 is the PKC phosphorylation site in SCN5A. An interesting finding in this study is that certain non-PKC sites (Y1795C, Y1795H, and DeltaKPQ) rendered the SCN5A channel sensitive to PKC, indicating an interaction between different sites in the channel.

Ruan et al.129 reported that the SCN5A-F1473S variant expressed in HEK293 cells exhibited a significantly inhibited peak INa. Immunostaining revealed that the mutant SCN5A channel remained in the cytoplasm, indicating a trafficking defect. However, the use of mexiletine was able to rescue the trafficking defect of F1473S, leading to an increase in the peak INa. Another study conducted by Zhang found that alpha-allocryptopine significantly enhanced the peak INa of the SCN5A-T353I variant, but not the WT- SCN5A channels.130
SCN5A-T353I is a mutant with impaired trafficking, but alpha-allocryptopine was found to increase the trafficking of this mutant to plasma membrane, resulting in an increase in the peak INa. This finding helps explain why SCN5A-T353I is more susceptible to the effect of alpha-allocryptopine and suggests that variants that affect channel trafficking may have a particularly significant impact on the effects of drugs that also influence channel trafficking.

A study revealed that ML277 and R-L3 enhanced Kv7.1 in homozygote KCNQ1-KCNE1-G52R and KCNQ1-KCNE1-L51H, as well as in channel complexes that imitate heterogeneous expression of Kv7.1 variants found in patients. However, these drugs did not have the same effect on wild type channels. Similar results were observed for the KCNQ1- S546L/KCNE1 variant when exposed to ML277 and R-L3. Both drugs could affect KCNQ1 and KCNE1 variants, but ML277 was more effective than R-L3. Interestingly, the KCNE1-D76N variant had the greatest impact on the effects of both drugs.131 It was discovered that KCNE1 subunits can interact with the putative binding site for R-L3 in the S6 domain of the KCNQ1 subunit, which is facing away from the central cavity.132 Additionally, previous data indicated that KCNQ1 was more sensitive to R-L3 compared to the KCNQ1 plus KCNE1 channel.133 This suggests that R-L3 and the KCNE1 subunit may compete for the same binding site on the KCNQ1 subunit, thereby influencing the effects of R-13 on the KCNQ1 channel. These data suggest that the ancillary subunit is important not only for KCNQ1 channel function but also for drug effects on the channel.

### Gene variants can change channel gating and thereby drug effects

Multiple variants have been identified that interrupt the fast inactivation process of the hERG channel, resulting in reduced effects of drugs e.g. methanesulfonanilides.102,103 One such variant is the KCNH2–N588K missense variant, which is located in the linker between the S5 and S6 segments of the hERG channel. This variant can impair channel inactivation and decrease the channel's affinity for class III antiarrhythmic drugs.

Regarding the mechanism of how channel inactivation influences drug effects, it has been suspected that when a drug like sotalol binds to the channel in its open state,104 the inactivation of the channel can stabilise the drug on its binding site, thereby increasing the drug's affinity. As a result, the inactivation-impairing variant N588K is resistant to sotalol because the defect in inactivation reduces the drug's affinity. This may help us understand why KCNH2–N588K is resistant to class III antiarrhythmic drugs, which depend on inactivation.

Besides, it has been suggested that the fast inactivation process of the hERG channel can cause allosteric changes in the inner mouth region. This in turn facilitates the development of a high affinity binding site for certain drugs.104,105 Several hERG variants, such as N588K, S620T,103 T623A, S624A, V625A, G648A, Y652A, F656A,106 G628C/S631C104 and S631A,107,108 have been tested to determine the relationship between drug potency and inactivation. These amino-acid residues associated with inactivation are located in different regions near or at the extracellular face of the channel: 1) the turret, 2) the domain of the outer mouth of the pore (C-terminal side of the pore loop), and 3) inside the pore loop. It is known that most drugs that block the hERG channel with high affinity access the channel pore cavity from the intracellular side when the channel is open, and the canonical high-affinity drug-binding site largely depends on two aromatic residues (F656 and Y652).106 However, it is unclear how the inactivation, which is dependant on residues near the extracellular face of the channel, affects drug effects occurring in residues in S6 near the intracellular side of the channel pore. The phenomenon that the effect of disopyramide is only slightly reduced by either the N588K or S631A single variant, but significantly attenuated by the double variants, suggests that hERG channel inactivation may involve two synergistic processes, each independently influenced by variants at different sites such as the turret or outer mouth of the pore.

Sodium channel blockers such as mexiletine, flecainide, and ranolazine are potential drugs for treating LQT3 because they can selectively inhibit the late sodium channel current. However, the response of LQT3 patients to these drugs can vary, indicating that the effects of the drugs may depend on genetic variants.

Experimental data (Table 4) on the impact of LQTS3 variants show that different variants can affect sodium channel gating kinetics in different or similar ways.110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122 Additionally, a variant can respond differently or similarly to different drugs. These findings suggest that relying solely on cellular electrophysiological data, such as activation, inactivation and recovery from inactivation, is insufficient to determine specific efficacy of different drugs for different gene variants or to guide personalised therapy.Table 4The impact of long-QT syndrome 3 (LQTS3) variants on sodium channel gating and drug effects.Variant in SCN5AINa–PINa-LActInacRecDrugRefI397FIcLSRS0Mex (+)109V411MIcLS0DcMex (+)109L711V0LSRS0Mex (−)109S941NIcLSRSDcMex (−)110Ic0LSAcMex (−)109P1332LDsLS0DcMex (+)110Ic0LSAcMex (+)109deltaKPQIcRSLSDcMex (+)109Fle (+)86LSDcFle (+)111109R1623Q0RSLS0Mex (+)109DsIcRSRS112R1626PIcRSLS0Mex (+)109Ic0LS0Mex (+)110R1644HIcRSLSDcMex (+)109L1650F0RS0AcMex (+)109M1652R0RSRSAcMex (−)109Ic0RSDcMex (−)110I1771M0RSLS0Mex (−)109E1784KIcRSLSAcMex (+)109N1352SDsIcLSRS0Mex (+)113Y1767CDsIcLS0AcRan(+)114DsIc0RSMex (−)115A1656DDsIcRSLSMex (+)Ran(−)Fle (−)116116116V1763MDsIcRSRSAcMex (+)117L1786QDsIcRSLSFle (+)1181795insDLSAcFle (+)111I1756CAcFle (+)119N406KDsIcLSRS0Mex (+)120F1473CIc0LSAcMex (+)121Ic0LSAcMex (+)Fle (+)Ran(+)122122122Ds, decrease; Ic, increase; RS, rightward shift; LS, leftward shift; 0, no change; Dc, decelerate; Ac, acelerate; (+), effective; (−), no effect; Pl, prolongation, INa-p, peak INa; INa-L, late INa; Act, activation; Inac, inactivation; Rec, recovery; Ref, reference.

The impact of long-QT syndrome 3 (LQTS3) variants on sodium channel gating and drug effects.

Ds, decrease; Ic, increase; RS, rightward shift; LS, leftward shift; 0, no change; Dc, decelerate; Ac, acelerate; (+), effective; (−), no effect; Pl, prolongation, INa-p, peak INa; INa-L, late INa; Act, activation; Inac, inactivation; Rec, recovery; Ref, reference.

Zhu et al. conducted a study to investigate how certain SCN5A variants differentially impacted mexiletine effects.109 Their findings revealed that mexiletine causes changes in the conformation of the voltage-sensing domain (VSD) in Domain-III (DIII) of the cardiac Na+-channel. The DIII-VSD was found to be influenced by various LQTS3 variants, indicating that changes in the DIII-VSD conformation can impact the blocking effect of mexiletine.

### Position and placed amino acid of variants impact drug effects

The C-type inactivation-deficient variants, S620T and S631A in the hERG channel, reduce verapamil blockage. This suggests that inactivation is crucial for verapamil blockade. Interestingly, the KCNH2-S620T variant decreases verapamil-induced blockage 20 times more than the KCNH2-S631A variant does. It has been suggested that verapamil enters the cell membrane as a neutral form and acts at a site within the pore from the intracellular side, which likely contains the serine at position 620.107 Furthermore, it was observed that KCNH2-S620C, KCNH2-S620T, KCNH2-S631A and KCNH2-S631V significantly increase the half maximum inhibitory concentration (IC50) of dofetilide for blocking the channel. Notably, KCNH2-S620T and KCNH2-S631V have a much stronger impact than KCNH2-S620C and KCNH2-S631A, respectively.103 These findings indicate that both the variant site and the replaced amino acid are important factors affecting the impact on drug effects.

Mikuni et al. discovered that both the F340A and F340C mutants of KCNQ1 reduced the effect of isoflurane. However, KCNQ1-F340A was found to be more effective than KCNQ1-F340C in reducing the isoflurane effect.123 This difference may be attributed to the fact that phenylalanine and alanine are non-polar, while cysteine has an uncharged polar character.

### Variants impact drug effects via changing regulation of channel function

Beside gene variants, there are other factors that can affect the effects of drugs. Abdelsayed et al. demonstrated the combined impact of external triggers and an SCN5A variant on the effects of ranolazine.124 They discovered that both high temperature (41 °C) and high intracellular calcium weakened the effectiveness of ranolazine in reducing SCN5A-E1784K late INa. The fast inactivation kinetics of E1784K were not influenced by temperature, indicating that channel inactivation likely does not contribute to the sensitivity of late INa to temperature. Instead, a structural rearrangement can occur in DIVS4 at high temperature, causing the voltage sensor to a state that can enhance the conductance in E1784K.125 As a result, the blockade of ranolazine is reduced. It is speculated that the SCN5A-E1784K mutation can disrupt either the calcium-dependant or calcium–independent interactions between the DIII-DIV linker and the C-terminal domain resulting in the inhibition of the calcium-dependant facilitation in Nav1.5. This mutation may create a high entropy, unstable structure in the C-terminal domain. When the intracellular calcium level rises, the calcified calmodulin can reduce its affinity for the IQ motif, thereby increasing the entropy of the C-terminal domain.126 The increased entropy caused by calcium-bound calmodulin in the C-terminal domain appears to hinder ranolazine from reaching the inner vestibule of the channel pore.

Galleano investigated the mechanism behind the disruption of channel steady-state inactivation caused by phosphorylation of SCN5A-Y1495.127 Surprisingly, they discovered that the SCN5A-Q1476R mutant did not independently affect channel inactivation, but it enhanced the impairment of steady-state inactivation resulting from phosphorylation at the Y1495 site by promoting the release of the inactivation particle. These findings emphasise that gene variants can greatly strengthen the functional consequences including drug effects of SCN5A phosphorylation. This may have implications for understanding mutational phenotypes and guiding future drug development. Furthermore, it was observed that the PKC activator OAG strongly inhibited the late INa of the mutant (Y1795C, Y1795H, and DeltaKPQ) but not the WT channels.128 The effect of OAG on late INa was reduced by the PKC inhibitor staurosporine, eliminated by the S1503A variant, and replicated by the S1503D variant. This suggests that S1503 is the PKC phosphorylation site in SCN5A. An interesting finding in this study is that certain non-PKC sites (Y1795C, Y1795H, and DeltaKPQ) rendered the SCN5A channel sensitive to PKC, indicating an interaction between different sites in the channel.

### Variants impact drug effects by altering channel trafficking

Ruan et al.129 reported that the SCN5A-F1473S variant expressed in HEK293 cells exhibited a significantly inhibited peak INa. Immunostaining revealed that the mutant SCN5A channel remained in the cytoplasm, indicating a trafficking defect. However, the use of mexiletine was able to rescue the trafficking defect of F1473S, leading to an increase in the peak INa. Another study conducted by Zhang found that alpha-allocryptopine significantly enhanced the peak INa of the SCN5A-T353I variant, but not the WT- SCN5A channels.130
SCN5A-T353I is a mutant with impaired trafficking, but alpha-allocryptopine was found to increase the trafficking of this mutant to plasma membrane, resulting in an increase in the peak INa. This finding helps explain why SCN5A-T353I is more susceptible to the effect of alpha-allocryptopine and suggests that variants that affect channel trafficking may have a particularly significant impact on the effects of drugs that also influence channel trafficking.

### Variants impact drug effects through associated subunits

A study revealed that ML277 and R-L3 enhanced Kv7.1 in homozygote KCNQ1-KCNE1-G52R and KCNQ1-KCNE1-L51H, as well as in channel complexes that imitate heterogeneous expression of Kv7.1 variants found in patients. However, these drugs did not have the same effect on wild type channels. Similar results were observed for the KCNQ1- S546L/KCNE1 variant when exposed to ML277 and R-L3. Both drugs could affect KCNQ1 and KCNE1 variants, but ML277 was more effective than R-L3. Interestingly, the KCNE1-D76N variant had the greatest impact on the effects of both drugs.131 It was discovered that KCNE1 subunits can interact with the putative binding site for R-L3 in the S6 domain of the KCNQ1 subunit, which is facing away from the central cavity.132 Additionally, previous data indicated that KCNQ1 was more sensitive to R-L3 compared to the KCNQ1 plus KCNE1 channel.133 This suggests that R-L3 and the KCNE1 subunit may compete for the same binding site on the KCNQ1 subunit, thereby influencing the effects of R-13 on the KCNQ1 channel. These data suggest that the ancillary subunit is important not only for KCNQ1 channel function but also for drug effects on the channel.

### Summary and conclusion

The availability of drug tests for in SQTS patients is currently limited. So far, only quinidine has been proven effective in SQTS patients who have hERG variants, but this has been confirmed only through small studies conducted at individual centres. Quinidine has also been tested in SQTS patients with KCNQ1, KCNJ2, CACNA1C and CACNB2 variants, but the number of patients included in these studies is too small to determine its efficacy.

Currently, β-blockers are the preferred first-line drugs for the pharmacological treatment of LQTS. Mexiletine, flecainide, and ranolazine may be considered as alternative drugs for LQTS3. However, the response of LQTS to β-blockers and sodium channel blockers can vary depending on the genotype. There is not enough available data on drug testing in patients with other types of LQTS to draw meaningful conclusions.

Experimental studies on drug effects have tested numerous drugs using different models including animal models, computer models, heterologous expression systems and hiPSC-CMs with various gene variants. Data from these studies have shown that gene variants in hERG, KCNQ1 and SCN5A not only alter ion channel function, but also affect how drugs work.

Ion channel variants can influence channel conformation, gating, drug binding sites, trafficking and sensitivity to intracellular regulators, all of which can impact the channel's response to drugs. Therefore, it can be concluded that the effects of drugs may vary in SQTS and LQTS patients with different variants. Conducting variant-specific drug testing may be helpful in identifying suitable drugs for SQTS and LQTS, particularly for genotype-guided therapy of these diseases (Fig. 1).

### Outstanding questions

The cardiac channelopathies, SQTS and LQTS, are genetic diseases associated with malignant arrhythmias. However, the severity of risk can vary among different genotypes. Optimal therapy for these conditions is still lacking. In the case of LQTS, beta-blockers and sodium channel blockers can be used. For SQTS, only a limited number of effective drugs have been identified in limited studies, with quinidine being recommended for clinical application. Experimental studies have investigated more drugs in different models with different gene variants, providing helpful information. However, many questions still remain based on the available data. For example, the currently effective drugs have only been tested on patients with certain gene variants, and their effectiveness for other untested variants is unknown. Some drugs have only been tested in experimental models, and whether they are effective in patients is uncertain. Additionally, only a limited number of drugs have been investigated for most of the detected pathogenetic variants, and it remains to be seen if other untested drugs can be effective for these variants. The impact of variants on drug effects may also be synergistic, but data on this are very limited. Further examination is needed to determine if double or multiple variants differentially affect drug effects. Future studies will benefit from new techniques such as hiPSC plus gene editing, computer modelling, biological information and artificial intelligence techniques. These advancements have the potential to promote the design, development and testing of drugs for cardiac channelopathy with specific gene variants. It is anticipated that more effective drugs for genotype-specific therapy of SQTS and LQTS will be discovered in the near future. On the other hand, the application of gene-editing or gene-therapy in patients may reduce or even eliminate the need for the development of genotype-specific therapies by correcting pathogenic gene variants.

### Discrepancies and limitations of the current studies

When it comes to clinical studies on SQTS, the number of published cases is limited. This is related to the absence of a large international registry including enough patients. Therefore, the published data of small single centre studies included very few cases. At maximum, e.g. for hydroquinidine, 16 patients have been reported showing a reduction of arrhythmic events to 0%, but nevertheless no information in these cases on the underlying gene variant is available.50 At cellular level two studies showed a possible efficacy of hydroquinidine regarding prolongation of action potential duration and anti-arrhythmic effect in SQTS carrying T618I. However, the clinical data of a small study of SQTS carrying T618I are not conclusive.21 These data show a prolongation of the QTc interval but not an anti-arrhythmic effect in all cases. A further important limitation in SQTS is that different genes are related to SQTS and there is an unmet need to model these in animal models and ideally in addition in hiPSC-CMs. Another important limitation is that in up to 70% of SQTS cases the genetic cause is not elusive yet, which is important to understand the drug–gene interaction in SQTS.

When it comes to LQTS, obviously the same problem is common. e.g. non-selective beta-blockers are recommended in patients according to current guidelines. However, clinical studies are not comprehensive and conclusive regarding this point. Whereas in large number of LQTS patients nadolol seems to be more effective compared to propranolol, other studies including smaller number of patients showed that nadolol might be less effective than propranolol.73,134 Besides the patient number, another limitation of most clinical studies is that the impact of gene variants on drug effects, which may be a reason for the discrepancy of clinical data on drug efficacy in different patients, was not investigated.

Of note, regarding the clinical studies in LQTS and SQTS the current knowledge is based on registries rather than randomised clinical studies. Therefore, randomised clinical studies and/or at least prospective data evaluation according to a standard protocol is required to answer important questions and to understand these discrepancies of current literatures.

### Contributors

ZZ, XZ, YZ, IA and IE contributed to the conception and design of the review. The first draft was written by ZZ, XZ, KN, WS, WX and NH, AM, AW, ZZ, XZ, YZ, IA and IE revised the manuscript. All authors approved the submitted version.

### Declaration of interests

All authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.



# SUPPLEMENTAL FILE 1: main.pdf

# Preparing to download ...

[HHS Vulnerability Disclosure](https://www.hhs.gov/vulnerability-disclosure-policy/index.html)