# MAIN TEXT

## The proteostasis interactomes of trafficking-deficient variants of the voltage-gated potassium channel KV11.1 associated with long QT syndrome

### Abstract

The voltage-gated potassium ion channel KV11.1 plays a critical role in cardiac repolarization. Genetic variants that render Kv11.1 dysfunctional cause long QT syndrome (LQTS), which is associated with fatal arrhythmias. Approximately 90% of LQTS-associated variants cause intracellular protein transport (trafficking) dysfunction, which pharmacological chaperones like E-4031 can rescue. Protein folding and trafficking decisions are regulated by chaperones, protein quality control factors, and trafficking machinery comprising the cellular proteostasis network. Here, we test whether trafficking dysfunction is associated with alterations in the proteostasis network of pathogenic Kv11.1 variants and whether pharmacological chaperones can normalize the proteostasis network of responsive variants. We used affinity-purification coupled with tandem mass tag–based quantitative mass spectrometry to assess protein interaction changes of WT KV11.1 or trafficking-deficient channel variants in the presence or absence of E-4031. We identified 572 core KV11.1 protein interactors. Trafficking-deficient variants KV11.1-G601S and KV11.1-G601S-G965∗ had significantly increased interactions with proteins responsible for folding, trafficking, and degradation compared to WT. We confirmed previous findings that the proteasome is critical for KV11.1 degradation. Our report provides the first comprehensive characterization of protein quality control mechanisms of KV11.1. We find extensive interactome remodeling associated with trafficking-deficient KV11.1 variants and with pharmacological chaperone rescue of KV11.1 cell surface expression. The identified protein interactions could be targeted therapeutically to improve KV11.1 trafficking and treat LQTS.

### Results

Our primary objective was to understand how the proteostasis network differs between WT KV11.1 and pathogenic KV11.1 variants with impaired trafficking. We utilized a well-documented trafficking-deficient variant, KV11.1-G601S, and a double mutant with the same variant and a C-terminal truncation (KV11.1-G601S-G965∗). The double mutant lacks the ER retention signal RXR (amino acids 1005–1007). A truncated variant, G965X, was previously shown to have increased function compared to WT channel, which suggests the trafficking-defect in the double mutant is due to the G601S mutation (23). Henceforth, we will denote our double variant as G965∗. We included this variant in the study to examine how the ER retention motif could influence the proteostasis network of KV11.1.

To map the complete interactome of the KV11.1 protein, including all direct and indirect protein interactions, we employed an affinity purification approach coupled with tandem mass tag (TMT) labeled mass spectrometry (MS) on whole-cell lysates from human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells (Fig. 1A). In this procedure, cells are lysed gently to preserve native interactions, coimmunoprecipitated using anti-KV11.1 antibody, eluted, and digested. Subsequently, peptides from each sample are labeled with an isobaric TMT reagent, allowing for simultaneous recordings of protein abundances in up to 18 samples in a single MS run. Differences in protein contacts and interactions between WT ion channels and their genetic variants are then quantifiable. While these networks remain largely unknown for KV11.1, research has illuminated the networks for several other ion channel disorders (14, 15, 24, 25).Figure 1Identification of KV11.1 protein interactors.A, multiplexed affinity-purification mass spectrometry workflow for mapping KV11.1 and variant protein interactions. B, bar graph illustrating the normalized abundance of KV11.1 in TMT-labeled channels from replicates, with bars representing mean ± SD. C, volcano plots depicting KV11.1 interactors identified via multiplexed AP-MS proteomics in HEK293 cells expressing WT KV11.1 and two trafficking-deficient variants. The plots highlight significantly enriched proteins (shown in gray, q < 0.05 by multiple t-tests with false discovery rate correction using two-stage linear step-up of Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli), further divided using manual gene ontology terms (N = 10) and color-coded for clarity. Key proteins like KV11.1 (KCNH2, red) and other genes are labeled. HEK, human embryonic kidney; TMT, tandem mass tag.

Identification of KV11.1 protein interactors.A, multiplexed affinity-purification mass spectrometry workflow for mapping KV11.1 and variant protein interactions. B, bar graph illustrating the normalized abundance of KV11.1 in TMT-labeled channels from replicates, with bars representing mean ± SD. C, volcano plots depicting KV11.1 interactors identified via multiplexed AP-MS proteomics in HEK293 cells expressing WT KV11.1 and two trafficking-deficient variants. The plots highlight significantly enriched proteins (shown in gray, q < 0.05 by multiple t-tests with false discovery rate correction using two-stage linear step-up of Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli), further divided using manual gene ontology terms (N = 10) and color-coded for clarity. Key proteins like KV11.1 (KCNH2, red) and other genes are labeled. HEK, human embryonic kidney; TMT, tandem mass tag.

To determine the proteostasis network of WT KV11.1, two trafficking-deficient variants, and variants treated with the pharmacological chaperone E-4031, we conducted 6 to 12 coimmunoprecipitations (Co-IPs) for each variant/treatment condition and four independent MS runs (WT, N = 12; G601S, N = 10; G601S E-4031, N = 6; G965∗, N = 9; G965∗ E-4031, N = 8) (Table S2). We included untransfected mock controls (N = 12) to assess the abundance of background proteins during the Co-IP procedure.

The Kv11.1 bait protein was confidently identified in all runs (mean ± SD, 48.8 ± 4.2% sequence coverage). Quantification of the TMT reporter ion intensities showed that the total abundance of WT KV11.1 protein measured by MS was elevated compared to the two KV11.1 variants (Fig. 1B), suggesting the KV11.1 variants undergo increased protein degradation, as has been reported for other ion channels with trafficking deficiency (14). We next defined statistically significant interactors by comparing the log2 fold enrichment in the Kv11.1 Co-IP conditions compared to untransfected sample. We conducted a median normalization based on total protein abundances for each TMT channel to account for slight variations in the overall Co-IP enrichment (Fig. S1). We filtered interactors based on a positive log2 fold change and multiple t-tests with false discovery rate (FDR) of q <0.05 (Table S3). In cells expressing WT KV11.1, we identified 88 significantly enriched protein interactions, 192 in the G601S variant, and 367 in the G965∗ variant (Figs. 1A and S2, A and B). These data suggest that trafficking-deficient variants have an enriched set of protein interactors, which is consistent with their increased surveillance by the proteostasis network (Fig. S2C). The G965∗ variant shares 50 interactors with WT, while the G601S variant only shares 32 interactors, indicating that G965∗ interactome more closely resembles that of WT Kv11.1 (Fig. S2, C–F).

We then compiled the interactors from each condition into a master list of interactors based on significance in at least one condition compared to untransfected cells. This resulted in 572 enriched KV11.1 protein interactions. We identified several known KV11.1 protein interactions such as 14-3-3ε (YWHAE) and calnexin (CANX) (Fig. 1C) (9, 26, 27, 28). Using manual annotation from UniProt, we classified each protein interaction with a unique gene ontology (GO) term to represent the most prominent biological process (Table S4).

Since a global understanding of KV11.1 interactions remained unknown until this study, we utilized the database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery (DAVID) bioinformatics to guide GO term classifications and cellular localization of protein interactors. Utilizing this database, we developed a cellular model for KV11.1 biogenesis (Fig. 2). Significant, intracellular protein interactions with KV11.1 were found from the nucleus (NUP85/88/93/107/155/160/210/214) to the plasma membrane (caveolin-1 [CAV1] and caveolae-associated protein [CAVIN1]). We found several significant interactions responsible for mRNA translation, which include eukaryotic initiation factors (EIF2/3/4) and ribosomal protein subunits (RPS3/5). These data are consistent with reports that voltage-gated potassium channels associate with ribosomal proteins and tetramer formation can occur prior to polypeptide exit from the ER translocation channel (29). We identified numerous folding chaperones that include components of the heat shock 40 complex (DNAJA1/2/3), a peptide prolyl isomerase (FK506 binding protein 8, FKBP8), the coiled-coil domain containing 47 protein (CCDC47)- a subunit of the multipass translocon (30, 31), calmegin (CLGN), lectin-based chaperone calnexin (CANX), and the endoplasmic reticulum lectin 1 (ERLEC1). CANX reportedly interacts with KV11.1 and this interaction is significantly reduced after pharmacological chaperone treatment of the trafficking-deficient N470D variant (9). DNAJB12 is responsible for K+ channel tetrameric assembly in a heat shock 70–independent manner (32). Several proteins involved in assisting with proteasomal degradation of unfolded proteins included the transitional ER ATPase p97 (VCP), the ER lipid raft-associated proteins 1 and 2 (ERLIN1/2), the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase itchy homolog (ITCH), and a core component of the multiple cullin-RING E3 ligases (cullin-3, CUL3). Proteins responsible for anterograde (ER to Golgi) and retrograde (Golgi to ER) trafficking included multiple vesicle coating proteins (COPA, COPB1/2, and COPG2), vesicle-associated membrane proteins (VAPA and VAPB), vesicle-trafficking protein (SEC22B), ER lumen protein retaining receptor 1 and 2 (KDELR1 and KDELR2), the transmembrane emp24 domain-containing protein 9 (TMED9), and the ADP ribosylation factor 4 (ARF4). Plasma membrane transport protein interactions included filamin A (FLNA), plakophilin 2 and 3 (PKP2/3), Hyccin (HYCC1), and myosin regulatory light chain 12A (MYL12A). Proteins responsible for endocytosis and lysosomal degradation included caeolin 1 (CAV1), caveolae associated protein (CAVIN1), protein spire homolog 1 (SPIRE1), the phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein (PICALM), multiple Ras-related proteins (RAB10, RAB32, and RAB14) and the spectrin beta chain nonerythrocytic 2 protein (SPTBN2). CAVIN1 was reported to have an influence in drug-induced LQTS (33). While not comprehensive, these proteins form key components of the KV11.1 interactome.Figure 2Diagram of KV11.1 protein trafficking and interaction networks. The cellular model highlights KV11.1 protein interactions involved in (1) nuclear import/export, (2) translation, (3) early N-linked glycosylation, (4) folding chaperones in the endoplasmic reticulum, (5) ER-Golgi transport, (6) plasma membrane transport, (7) endosomal recycling, and lysosomal degradation, and (8) proteasomal degradation. Each cellular organelle or critical process is marked in orange and underlined.

Diagram of KV11.1 protein trafficking and interaction networks. The cellular model highlights KV11.1 protein interactions involved in (1) nuclear import/export, (2) translation, (3) early N-linked glycosylation, (4) folding chaperones in the endoplasmic reticulum, (5) ER-Golgi transport, (6) plasma membrane transport, (7) endosomal recycling, and lysosomal degradation, and (8) proteasomal degradation. Each cellular organelle or critical process is marked in orange and underlined.

To quantitate variations in protein interactions between WT and variants, it was important to account for any variation in KV11.1 bait protein intensities (Fig. 1B). Therefore, the TMT abundances for each interactor from the master list were normalized to the KV11.1 bait protein abundance. We then used the WT KV11.1 conditions as a common reference point in each run. For each interactor, we calculated the log2 enrichment fold change comparing each variant and/or treatment condition to WT (Table S5). This established the enrichment fold change for each interactor from KV11.1 variants relative to the same protein in WT samples.

In aggregate, both trafficking-deficient KV11.1 variants exhibited a significant increase in protein interactions compared to WT, indicating either more extensive interaction networks within the ER and other cellular regions or prolonged interactions with quality control factors (Fig. 3A). Across all 572 enriched protein interactions, G601S had an elevated average log2 fold change from WT compared to the G965∗ variant (G601S 1.69 ± 0.02 versus G965∗ 1.04 ± 0.02, mean ± SEM). We utilized DAVID to determine significantly enriched pathways from the input of 572 enriched KV11.1 interacting proteins (34). Manual GO term assignment categorized each protein to one dominant function, whereas DAVID annotations group single proteins into all associated terms. The top four enriched DAVID GO terms from all 572 KV11.1 protein interactors included actin cytoskeleton and filament organization, proteasomal degradation, and mRNA stability (Fig. 3B). We further examined ten enriched GO terms responsible for trafficking and degradation as defined by DAVID to detail specific changes in protein interactions across various folding and trafficking-related domains (Fig. 3C and Table S6). These interactions represent unique functions in the cells such as mRNA translation initiation, ER-associated protein folding, ER to Golgi vesicle or nonvesicle-mediated transport, other transport specific to localization to the plasma membrane, endosomal recycling (vesicle-mediated transport), overall protein degradation via ER-associated degradation or PSM-specific degradation, and actin nucleation, which plays a variety of roles in maintaining the actin cytoskeleton. We discovered several proteins consistently enriched across all conditions, indicating high-confidence interactions. These included proteins involved in early N-linked glycosylation and degradation: ribophorin II (RPN2) and dolichyl-diphosphooligosaccharide-protein glycosyltransferase subunit (DDOST), folding glucosidase II alpha subunit (GANAB) and CANX, and neural precursor cell expressed developmentally downregulated protein 4-like (NEDD4L) (Fig. 3, D–H). Notably, we also identified a protein interaction between KV11.1 and the very long–chain 3-oxoacyl-CoA reductase (HSD17B12), which is responsible for fatty acid synthesis and involved in converting estrone to estradiol (Fig. 3I). Interestingly, G965∗ interactions levels were significantly decreased compared to G601S for interactors NEDD4L, RPN2, DDOST, and GANAB (Fig. 3, D–I).Figure 3Comparative protein interaction dynamics in KV11.1 and variants.A, heatmap illustrating the 572 enriched protein interactions from KV11.1 AP-MS experiments. Log2 fold changes are scaled to WT treated with 0.1% DMSO and ranked from highest to lowest fold change for G601S. B, the top four enriched pathway terms identified by DAVID analysis for the 572 enriched KV11.1 protein interactors, with the count of associated proteins for each GO term displayed within the bars. C, heatmap representing log2 fold change from WT KV11.1 for selective interactions, categorized and assessed using DAVID clustering to illustrate their potential functional significance and interconnectivity. D–I, dot plots illustrating quantified protein enrichment for individual genes, each dot representing a distinct biological replicate. In heat maps and dot plots, log2 fold change is scaled to WT KV11.1. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. Bars represent mean ± SD. AP-MS, affinity-purification coupled with quantitative mass spectrometry; DAVID, database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery; DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; GO, gene ontology.

Comparative protein interaction dynamics in KV11.1 and variants.A, heatmap illustrating the 572 enriched protein interactions from KV11.1 AP-MS experiments. Log2 fold changes are scaled to WT treated with 0.1% DMSO and ranked from highest to lowest fold change for G601S. B, the top four enriched pathway terms identified by DAVID analysis for the 572 enriched KV11.1 protein interactors, with the count of associated proteins for each GO term displayed within the bars. C, heatmap representing log2 fold change from WT KV11.1 for selective interactions, categorized and assessed using DAVID clustering to illustrate their potential functional significance and interconnectivity. D–I, dot plots illustrating quantified protein enrichment for individual genes, each dot representing a distinct biological replicate. In heat maps and dot plots, log2 fold change is scaled to WT KV11.1. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. Bars represent mean ± SD. AP-MS, affinity-purification coupled with quantitative mass spectrometry; DAVID, database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery; DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; GO, gene ontology.

We assessed the interaction changes between WT and the two mutant variants in an unbiased fashion using hierarchical clustering, which groups interactors based on intensity similarity (Figs. 4A and S4). Hierarchical clustering grouped the interactions into six clusters with similar intensities. Most protein interactions were in cluster 1, 3, and 5 (127, 152, and 108 proteins each respectively), with fewer proteins in clusters 2, 4, and 6 (49, 74, and 62 respectively). Two clusters (4 and 6) displayed similarly elevated interactions for the two variants when compared to WT and suggested that these protein interactions are not different between the two variants. The other four clusters had elevated interactions for G601S compared to G965∗, albeit the magnitude differed (Fig. 4B). To determine pathways overrepresented in each cluster, we carried out DAVID analysis to show which biological processes were enriched. For cluster 4 with similar interactions for the two mutants, we identified an enrichment of YWHA proteins responsible for protein targeting, positive regulation of protein insertion into mitochondrial membrane involved in apoptotic signaling pathway, and cellular protein localization (Fig. 4C). Cluster 6 was enriched for actin cytoskeleton organization and suggested that both variants similarly interact with these cytoskeletal proteins (Fig. 4D). All four clusters that had divergent interactions between the two variants were enriched for proteasomal mediated ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolism in cluster 1 (Fig. 4E), proteasomal catabolic processes in cluster 2 (Fig. 4F), ARP-2/3 actin nucleation in cluster 3 (Fig. 4G), and actin filament bundle assembly and network formation in cluster 5 (Fig. 4H). The data indicate a substantial portion of protein interactions involving KV11.1 occurs within the actin cytoskeleton, which was enriched in the largest clusters 3 and 5 as well as cluster 6. Notably, many of these interactions differ between the variants (3 and 5) while other interactions are similar between the two (cluster 6). Proteasomal mediated degradation emerged as the dominant degradation pathway for KV11.1, featured in clusters 1 and 2.Figure 4Cluster Analysis of trafficking-deficient KV11.1 interactomes.A, hierarchical clustering of 572 protein interactors arranged by intensity similarity. Abundances for G601S and G965∗ variants in relation to WT KV11.1 were transformed into an Euclidian distance matrix and clustered using Ward’s minimum variance method. Each row represents an interactor with color indicating log2 fold change normalized to WT. B, swarm plots for all clusters depicting the log2 fold change normalized to WT for each variant and cluster. Statistical significance was calculated by ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. Bars represent mean ± SD. C–H, bar charts showing fold change compared to WT for individual genes within the top enriched protein GO term for each cluster. All samples were treated with vehicle (0.1%) for 24 h before sample collection. GO, gene ontology.

Cluster Analysis of trafficking-deficient KV11.1 interactomes.A, hierarchical clustering of 572 protein interactors arranged by intensity similarity. Abundances for G601S and G965∗ variants in relation to WT KV11.1 were transformed into an Euclidian distance matrix and clustered using Ward’s minimum variance method. Each row represents an interactor with color indicating log2 fold change normalized to WT. B, swarm plots for all clusters depicting the log2 fold change normalized to WT for each variant and cluster. Statistical significance was calculated by ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. Bars represent mean ± SD. C–H, bar charts showing fold change compared to WT for individual genes within the top enriched protein GO term for each cluster. All samples were treated with vehicle (0.1%) for 24 h before sample collection. GO, gene ontology.

We next explored how chaperone treatment with E-4031 alters interactions of trafficking-deficient variants. The potent KV11.1 channel inhibitor, E-4031, a methane sulfonamide class III antiarrhythmic similar to the United States Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs dofetilide and ibutilide, significantly enhances membrane trafficking of KV11.1 variants but not WT. Here, we show this by increased fully glycosylated KV11.1 protein (155 kD) after E-4031 treatment in the variants and an improved trafficking efficiency by comparison of the 155 kD band to total KV11.1 (Fig. 5, A and B). Reports have shown that most of the fully glycosylated protein resides on the cellular membrane due to its susceptibility to extracellular protease digestions (35). To confirm increased function in the channel variants, we measured currents with patch clamp electrophysiology. Treatment with E-4031 for 24 h significantly enhanced KV11.1 variant currents (Fig. 5, C–E), consistent with the increased membrane trafficking shown in Figure 5A. For WT, 24-h treatment with E-4031 reduced currents (Fig. 5D), indicating that the drug does not improve WT trafficking and the washout of drug is incomplete.Figure 5Impact of E-4031 on KV11.1 trafficking and function.A, Western blot depicting KV11.1 and variant protein expression in HEK293 cells in the absence or presence of E-4031 for 24 h. The truncated G965∗ has a lower molecular weight of ∼100 kD than 135 kD of full-length Kv11.1. B, bar graph illustrating KV11.1 trafficking efficiency quantified by the ratio of trafficked 155 kD glycosylated protein to total KV11.1 protein, including untrafficked 135 kD KV11.1 protein. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. All points are from biological replicates performed in two blots. C, representative KV11.1 current traces at −120 mV step from voltage-clamp experiments after 24-h treatment and washout. Inset: voltage-clamp protocol. KV11.1 current was quantified as the peak inward current upon repolarization to −120 mV (gray box). D, bar graph comparing WT KV11.1 currents after 24-h treatment and washout of vehicle or E-4031. Data analyzed with unpaired student’s t test. Each data point represents individual cells. E, bar graphs comparing WT KV11.1 current and two trafficking-deficient variants after 24-h treatment with washout. All experiments follow a 24-h treatment with vehicle (0.1% DMSO) or E-4031 (10 μM). Patch clamp experiments included a 30-min washout to remove residual E-4031. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Statistical significance was calculated by Kruskal–Wallis with post hoc Dunn’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001, ∗∗∗ = 0.0001. DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; HEK, human embryonic kidney.

Impact of E-4031 on KV11.1 trafficking and function.A, Western blot depicting KV11.1 and variant protein expression in HEK293 cells in the absence or presence of E-4031 for 24 h. The truncated G965∗ has a lower molecular weight of ∼100 kD than 135 kD of full-length Kv11.1. B, bar graph illustrating KV11.1 trafficking efficiency quantified by the ratio of trafficked 155 kD glycosylated protein to total KV11.1 protein, including untrafficked 135 kD KV11.1 protein. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. All points are from biological replicates performed in two blots. C, representative KV11.1 current traces at −120 mV step from voltage-clamp experiments after 24-h treatment and washout. Inset: voltage-clamp protocol. KV11.1 current was quantified as the peak inward current upon repolarization to −120 mV (gray box). D, bar graph comparing WT KV11.1 currents after 24-h treatment and washout of vehicle or E-4031. Data analyzed with unpaired student’s t test. Each data point represents individual cells. E, bar graphs comparing WT KV11.1 current and two trafficking-deficient variants after 24-h treatment with washout. All experiments follow a 24-h treatment with vehicle (0.1% DMSO) or E-4031 (10 μM). Patch clamp experiments included a 30-min washout to remove residual E-4031. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Statistical significance was calculated by Kruskal–Wallis with post hoc Dunn’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001, ∗∗∗ = 0.0001. DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; HEK, human embryonic kidney.

To date, little is known about the underlying mechanism of how E-4031 increases KV11.1 variant membrane trafficking and function. Therefore, we used our comparative interactome dataset for the two trafficking-deficient KV11.1 variants to evaluate which interactions were changed by E-4031 treatment. We found disparate responses for two variants. Globally, E-4031 altered protein interactions in the truncated variant G965∗ more than G601S (Fig. 6, A and B). There was a 22% reduction in mean log2 fold change/WT in the G965∗ variant compared to only 7.6% reduction in the G601S variant (log2 fold change 1.69–1.56 G601S and 1.04–0.81 G965∗). DAVID pathway analysis suggested that proteasomal proteins were significantly enriched in our dataset of KV11.1 interactors (Fig. 3B). Thus, we scrutinized manually curated GO terms related to proteasomal degradation from our data. Our data suggest that protein interactions with structural components of the PSM and ubiquitination were significantly reduced in both variants treated with E-4031 but more so in the G965∗ variant (Fig. 6, C and D). Manually annotated GO terms showed several individual proteins that had significant changes after E-4031 treatment in either variant (Fig. S4). Observing the top five protein interactions with the greatest change after E-4031 from ten separate GO terms highlighted some key interactions in different pathways (Fig. 6E). Together these data suggest several interactions significantly altered after E-4031 treatment.Figure 6Impact of chaperone treatment on protein interactions in trafficking-deficient KV11.1 variants.A, heatmap and (B) violin plots showing comparison of log2 fold changes over WT of 572 enriched protein interactions in trafficking-deficient variants G601S and G965∗, with or without 24-h E-4031 treatment. Statistical significance was calculated by paired two-tailed t test, and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. C and D, correlation of proteasomal degradation protein interactions for (C) G601S and (D) G965∗ in absence (x-axis) or presence (y-axis) of E-4031 (all log2 fold changes normalized to WT with DMSO). The black dotted line indicates the normal line with a slope of 1 and intercept at the origin. The orange error bars from each individual protein represent the SEM for vehicle (0.1% DMSO, horizontal) and E-4031 (10 μM, vertical). E, heatmap showing the top five interactions from ten manually annotated GO terms sorted by largest difference in log2 fold change/WT in absence or presence of E-4031 for 24 h. Only three proteins responsible for autophagy were enriched for KV11.1 interaction in our dataset. Cells were treated with either vehicle (0.1% DMSO) or E-4031 (10 μM) for 24 h before experiments. DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; GO, gene ontology.

Impact of chaperone treatment on protein interactions in trafficking-deficient KV11.1 variants.A, heatmap and (B) violin plots showing comparison of log2 fold changes over WT of 572 enriched protein interactions in trafficking-deficient variants G601S and G965∗, with or without 24-h E-4031 treatment. Statistical significance was calculated by paired two-tailed t test, and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. C and D, correlation of proteasomal degradation protein interactions for (C) G601S and (D) G965∗ in absence (x-axis) or presence (y-axis) of E-4031 (all log2 fold changes normalized to WT with DMSO). The black dotted line indicates the normal line with a slope of 1 and intercept at the origin. The orange error bars from each individual protein represent the SEM for vehicle (0.1% DMSO, horizontal) and E-4031 (10 μM, vertical). E, heatmap showing the top five interactions from ten manually annotated GO terms sorted by largest difference in log2 fold change/WT in absence or presence of E-4031 for 24 h. Only three proteins responsible for autophagy were enriched for KV11.1 interaction in our dataset. Cells were treated with either vehicle (0.1% DMSO) or E-4031 (10 μM) for 24 h before experiments. DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; GO, gene ontology.

The following individual interactors were significantly reduced in both variants after E-4031 treatment: part of the exocyst complex responsible for docking exocytic vesicles with fusion sites in the plasma membrane (EXOC7), the ER-associated degradation protein sel-1 homolog 1 (SEL1L), the E3 ubiquitin ligase listerin (LTN1) involved in ribosomal quality control, and lectin-based folding chaperones (CANX and ERLEC). Interactions reduced after E-4031 treatment specific to the G601S variant included the folding chaperone peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase (FKBP8), the BCL2-associated athanogene 6 (BAG6), and a subunit of the multipass translocon (CCDC47). Interactions reduced by E-4031 treatment specific to the G965∗ variant included small GTPases involved in membrane trafficking and vesicle transport (RAB10 and RAB9A) and a molecular chaperone in the BAG family (BAG3). Misfolded KV11.1 protein, unlike misfolded CFTR, has not been identified to aggregate in vitro. However, the interaction with BAG6, mainly in the full-length G601S variant, and formation of aggregates observed in purified KV11.1 protein indicate the potential aggregation of misfolded KV11.1 (6, 36, 37). We observed many proteins responsible for clathrin-dependent or clathrin-independent endocytosis that remained unchanged after E-4031 treatment (Fig. S5). These experiments highlighted the proteostasis network associated with KV11.1 and indicate that specific variants may exhibit differential responses to pharmacological treatment. Here, we have shown the remodeling of the proteostasis network is larger in the truncated variant (G965∗) even with lower interactions before treatment. The KV11.1 proteostasis network depicted here could guide the development of treatments that specifically target individual interacting elements to enhance function and alleviate LQTS caused by trafficking-deficient KV11.1 variants.

### Coimmunoprecipitation of KV11.1 and two trafficking-deficient variants

Our primary objective was to understand how the proteostasis network differs between WT KV11.1 and pathogenic KV11.1 variants with impaired trafficking. We utilized a well-documented trafficking-deficient variant, KV11.1-G601S, and a double mutant with the same variant and a C-terminal truncation (KV11.1-G601S-G965∗). The double mutant lacks the ER retention signal RXR (amino acids 1005–1007). A truncated variant, G965X, was previously shown to have increased function compared to WT channel, which suggests the trafficking-defect in the double mutant is due to the G601S mutation (23). Henceforth, we will denote our double variant as G965∗. We included this variant in the study to examine how the ER retention motif could influence the proteostasis network of KV11.1.

To map the complete interactome of the KV11.1 protein, including all direct and indirect protein interactions, we employed an affinity purification approach coupled with tandem mass tag (TMT) labeled mass spectrometry (MS) on whole-cell lysates from human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells (Fig. 1A). In this procedure, cells are lysed gently to preserve native interactions, coimmunoprecipitated using anti-KV11.1 antibody, eluted, and digested. Subsequently, peptides from each sample are labeled with an isobaric TMT reagent, allowing for simultaneous recordings of protein abundances in up to 18 samples in a single MS run. Differences in protein contacts and interactions between WT ion channels and their genetic variants are then quantifiable. While these networks remain largely unknown for KV11.1, research has illuminated the networks for several other ion channel disorders (14, 15, 24, 25).Figure 1Identification of KV11.1 protein interactors.A, multiplexed affinity-purification mass spectrometry workflow for mapping KV11.1 and variant protein interactions. B, bar graph illustrating the normalized abundance of KV11.1 in TMT-labeled channels from replicates, with bars representing mean ± SD. C, volcano plots depicting KV11.1 interactors identified via multiplexed AP-MS proteomics in HEK293 cells expressing WT KV11.1 and two trafficking-deficient variants. The plots highlight significantly enriched proteins (shown in gray, q < 0.05 by multiple t-tests with false discovery rate correction using two-stage linear step-up of Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli), further divided using manual gene ontology terms (N = 10) and color-coded for clarity. Key proteins like KV11.1 (KCNH2, red) and other genes are labeled. HEK, human embryonic kidney; TMT, tandem mass tag.

Identification of KV11.1 protein interactors.A, multiplexed affinity-purification mass spectrometry workflow for mapping KV11.1 and variant protein interactions. B, bar graph illustrating the normalized abundance of KV11.1 in TMT-labeled channels from replicates, with bars representing mean ± SD. C, volcano plots depicting KV11.1 interactors identified via multiplexed AP-MS proteomics in HEK293 cells expressing WT KV11.1 and two trafficking-deficient variants. The plots highlight significantly enriched proteins (shown in gray, q < 0.05 by multiple t-tests with false discovery rate correction using two-stage linear step-up of Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli), further divided using manual gene ontology terms (N = 10) and color-coded for clarity. Key proteins like KV11.1 (KCNH2, red) and other genes are labeled. HEK, human embryonic kidney; TMT, tandem mass tag.

To determine the proteostasis network of WT KV11.1, two trafficking-deficient variants, and variants treated with the pharmacological chaperone E-4031, we conducted 6 to 12 coimmunoprecipitations (Co-IPs) for each variant/treatment condition and four independent MS runs (WT, N = 12; G601S, N = 10; G601S E-4031, N = 6; G965∗, N = 9; G965∗ E-4031, N = 8) (Table S2). We included untransfected mock controls (N = 12) to assess the abundance of background proteins during the Co-IP procedure.

The Kv11.1 bait protein was confidently identified in all runs (mean ± SD, 48.8 ± 4.2% sequence coverage). Quantification of the TMT reporter ion intensities showed that the total abundance of WT KV11.1 protein measured by MS was elevated compared to the two KV11.1 variants (Fig. 1B), suggesting the KV11.1 variants undergo increased protein degradation, as has been reported for other ion channels with trafficking deficiency (14). We next defined statistically significant interactors by comparing the log2 fold enrichment in the Kv11.1 Co-IP conditions compared to untransfected sample. We conducted a median normalization based on total protein abundances for each TMT channel to account for slight variations in the overall Co-IP enrichment (Fig. S1). We filtered interactors based on a positive log2 fold change and multiple t-tests with false discovery rate (FDR) of q <0.05 (Table S3). In cells expressing WT KV11.1, we identified 88 significantly enriched protein interactions, 192 in the G601S variant, and 367 in the G965∗ variant (Figs. 1A and S2, A and B). These data suggest that trafficking-deficient variants have an enriched set of protein interactors, which is consistent with their increased surveillance by the proteostasis network (Fig. S2C). The G965∗ variant shares 50 interactors with WT, while the G601S variant only shares 32 interactors, indicating that G965∗ interactome more closely resembles that of WT Kv11.1 (Fig. S2, C–F).

We then compiled the interactors from each condition into a master list of interactors based on significance in at least one condition compared to untransfected cells. This resulted in 572 enriched KV11.1 protein interactions. We identified several known KV11.1 protein interactions such as 14-3-3ε (YWHAE) and calnexin (CANX) (Fig. 1C) (9, 26, 27, 28). Using manual annotation from UniProt, we classified each protein interaction with a unique gene ontology (GO) term to represent the most prominent biological process (Table S4).

### Cellular model of KV11.1 trafficking to plasma membrane

Since a global understanding of KV11.1 interactions remained unknown until this study, we utilized the database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery (DAVID) bioinformatics to guide GO term classifications and cellular localization of protein interactors. Utilizing this database, we developed a cellular model for KV11.1 biogenesis (Fig. 2). Significant, intracellular protein interactions with KV11.1 were found from the nucleus (NUP85/88/93/107/155/160/210/214) to the plasma membrane (caveolin-1 [CAV1] and caveolae-associated protein [CAVIN1]). We found several significant interactions responsible for mRNA translation, which include eukaryotic initiation factors (EIF2/3/4) and ribosomal protein subunits (RPS3/5). These data are consistent with reports that voltage-gated potassium channels associate with ribosomal proteins and tetramer formation can occur prior to polypeptide exit from the ER translocation channel (29). We identified numerous folding chaperones that include components of the heat shock 40 complex (DNAJA1/2/3), a peptide prolyl isomerase (FK506 binding protein 8, FKBP8), the coiled-coil domain containing 47 protein (CCDC47)- a subunit of the multipass translocon (30, 31), calmegin (CLGN), lectin-based chaperone calnexin (CANX), and the endoplasmic reticulum lectin 1 (ERLEC1). CANX reportedly interacts with KV11.1 and this interaction is significantly reduced after pharmacological chaperone treatment of the trafficking-deficient N470D variant (9). DNAJB12 is responsible for K+ channel tetrameric assembly in a heat shock 70–independent manner (32). Several proteins involved in assisting with proteasomal degradation of unfolded proteins included the transitional ER ATPase p97 (VCP), the ER lipid raft-associated proteins 1 and 2 (ERLIN1/2), the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase itchy homolog (ITCH), and a core component of the multiple cullin-RING E3 ligases (cullin-3, CUL3). Proteins responsible for anterograde (ER to Golgi) and retrograde (Golgi to ER) trafficking included multiple vesicle coating proteins (COPA, COPB1/2, and COPG2), vesicle-associated membrane proteins (VAPA and VAPB), vesicle-trafficking protein (SEC22B), ER lumen protein retaining receptor 1 and 2 (KDELR1 and KDELR2), the transmembrane emp24 domain-containing protein 9 (TMED9), and the ADP ribosylation factor 4 (ARF4). Plasma membrane transport protein interactions included filamin A (FLNA), plakophilin 2 and 3 (PKP2/3), Hyccin (HYCC1), and myosin regulatory light chain 12A (MYL12A). Proteins responsible for endocytosis and lysosomal degradation included caeolin 1 (CAV1), caveolae associated protein (CAVIN1), protein spire homolog 1 (SPIRE1), the phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein (PICALM), multiple Ras-related proteins (RAB10, RAB32, and RAB14) and the spectrin beta chain nonerythrocytic 2 protein (SPTBN2). CAVIN1 was reported to have an influence in drug-induced LQTS (33). While not comprehensive, these proteins form key components of the KV11.1 interactome.Figure 2Diagram of KV11.1 protein trafficking and interaction networks. The cellular model highlights KV11.1 protein interactions involved in (1) nuclear import/export, (2) translation, (3) early N-linked glycosylation, (4) folding chaperones in the endoplasmic reticulum, (5) ER-Golgi transport, (6) plasma membrane transport, (7) endosomal recycling, and lysosomal degradation, and (8) proteasomal degradation. Each cellular organelle or critical process is marked in orange and underlined.

Diagram of KV11.1 protein trafficking and interaction networks. The cellular model highlights KV11.1 protein interactions involved in (1) nuclear import/export, (2) translation, (3) early N-linked glycosylation, (4) folding chaperones in the endoplasmic reticulum, (5) ER-Golgi transport, (6) plasma membrane transport, (7) endosomal recycling, and lysosomal degradation, and (8) proteasomal degradation. Each cellular organelle or critical process is marked in orange and underlined.

### Trafficking-deficient variants show increased protein interactions

To quantitate variations in protein interactions between WT and variants, it was important to account for any variation in KV11.1 bait protein intensities (Fig. 1B). Therefore, the TMT abundances for each interactor from the master list were normalized to the KV11.1 bait protein abundance. We then used the WT KV11.1 conditions as a common reference point in each run. For each interactor, we calculated the log2 enrichment fold change comparing each variant and/or treatment condition to WT (Table S5). This established the enrichment fold change for each interactor from KV11.1 variants relative to the same protein in WT samples.

In aggregate, both trafficking-deficient KV11.1 variants exhibited a significant increase in protein interactions compared to WT, indicating either more extensive interaction networks within the ER and other cellular regions or prolonged interactions with quality control factors (Fig. 3A). Across all 572 enriched protein interactions, G601S had an elevated average log2 fold change from WT compared to the G965∗ variant (G601S 1.69 ± 0.02 versus G965∗ 1.04 ± 0.02, mean ± SEM). We utilized DAVID to determine significantly enriched pathways from the input of 572 enriched KV11.1 interacting proteins (34). Manual GO term assignment categorized each protein to one dominant function, whereas DAVID annotations group single proteins into all associated terms. The top four enriched DAVID GO terms from all 572 KV11.1 protein interactors included actin cytoskeleton and filament organization, proteasomal degradation, and mRNA stability (Fig. 3B). We further examined ten enriched GO terms responsible for trafficking and degradation as defined by DAVID to detail specific changes in protein interactions across various folding and trafficking-related domains (Fig. 3C and Table S6). These interactions represent unique functions in the cells such as mRNA translation initiation, ER-associated protein folding, ER to Golgi vesicle or nonvesicle-mediated transport, other transport specific to localization to the plasma membrane, endosomal recycling (vesicle-mediated transport), overall protein degradation via ER-associated degradation or PSM-specific degradation, and actin nucleation, which plays a variety of roles in maintaining the actin cytoskeleton. We discovered several proteins consistently enriched across all conditions, indicating high-confidence interactions. These included proteins involved in early N-linked glycosylation and degradation: ribophorin II (RPN2) and dolichyl-diphosphooligosaccharide-protein glycosyltransferase subunit (DDOST), folding glucosidase II alpha subunit (GANAB) and CANX, and neural precursor cell expressed developmentally downregulated protein 4-like (NEDD4L) (Fig. 3, D–H). Notably, we also identified a protein interaction between KV11.1 and the very long–chain 3-oxoacyl-CoA reductase (HSD17B12), which is responsible for fatty acid synthesis and involved in converting estrone to estradiol (Fig. 3I). Interestingly, G965∗ interactions levels were significantly decreased compared to G601S for interactors NEDD4L, RPN2, DDOST, and GANAB (Fig. 3, D–I).Figure 3Comparative protein interaction dynamics in KV11.1 and variants.A, heatmap illustrating the 572 enriched protein interactions from KV11.1 AP-MS experiments. Log2 fold changes are scaled to WT treated with 0.1% DMSO and ranked from highest to lowest fold change for G601S. B, the top four enriched pathway terms identified by DAVID analysis for the 572 enriched KV11.1 protein interactors, with the count of associated proteins for each GO term displayed within the bars. C, heatmap representing log2 fold change from WT KV11.1 for selective interactions, categorized and assessed using DAVID clustering to illustrate their potential functional significance and interconnectivity. D–I, dot plots illustrating quantified protein enrichment for individual genes, each dot representing a distinct biological replicate. In heat maps and dot plots, log2 fold change is scaled to WT KV11.1. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. Bars represent mean ± SD. AP-MS, affinity-purification coupled with quantitative mass spectrometry; DAVID, database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery; DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; GO, gene ontology.

Comparative protein interaction dynamics in KV11.1 and variants.A, heatmap illustrating the 572 enriched protein interactions from KV11.1 AP-MS experiments. Log2 fold changes are scaled to WT treated with 0.1% DMSO and ranked from highest to lowest fold change for G601S. B, the top four enriched pathway terms identified by DAVID analysis for the 572 enriched KV11.1 protein interactors, with the count of associated proteins for each GO term displayed within the bars. C, heatmap representing log2 fold change from WT KV11.1 for selective interactions, categorized and assessed using DAVID clustering to illustrate their potential functional significance and interconnectivity. D–I, dot plots illustrating quantified protein enrichment for individual genes, each dot representing a distinct biological replicate. In heat maps and dot plots, log2 fold change is scaled to WT KV11.1. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. Bars represent mean ± SD. AP-MS, affinity-purification coupled with quantitative mass spectrometry; DAVID, database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery; DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; GO, gene ontology.

We assessed the interaction changes between WT and the two mutant variants in an unbiased fashion using hierarchical clustering, which groups interactors based on intensity similarity (Figs. 4A and S4). Hierarchical clustering grouped the interactions into six clusters with similar intensities. Most protein interactions were in cluster 1, 3, and 5 (127, 152, and 108 proteins each respectively), with fewer proteins in clusters 2, 4, and 6 (49, 74, and 62 respectively). Two clusters (4 and 6) displayed similarly elevated interactions for the two variants when compared to WT and suggested that these protein interactions are not different between the two variants. The other four clusters had elevated interactions for G601S compared to G965∗, albeit the magnitude differed (Fig. 4B). To determine pathways overrepresented in each cluster, we carried out DAVID analysis to show which biological processes were enriched. For cluster 4 with similar interactions for the two mutants, we identified an enrichment of YWHA proteins responsible for protein targeting, positive regulation of protein insertion into mitochondrial membrane involved in apoptotic signaling pathway, and cellular protein localization (Fig. 4C). Cluster 6 was enriched for actin cytoskeleton organization and suggested that both variants similarly interact with these cytoskeletal proteins (Fig. 4D). All four clusters that had divergent interactions between the two variants were enriched for proteasomal mediated ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolism in cluster 1 (Fig. 4E), proteasomal catabolic processes in cluster 2 (Fig. 4F), ARP-2/3 actin nucleation in cluster 3 (Fig. 4G), and actin filament bundle assembly and network formation in cluster 5 (Fig. 4H). The data indicate a substantial portion of protein interactions involving KV11.1 occurs within the actin cytoskeleton, which was enriched in the largest clusters 3 and 5 as well as cluster 6. Notably, many of these interactions differ between the variants (3 and 5) while other interactions are similar between the two (cluster 6). Proteasomal mediated degradation emerged as the dominant degradation pathway for KV11.1, featured in clusters 1 and 2.Figure 4Cluster Analysis of trafficking-deficient KV11.1 interactomes.A, hierarchical clustering of 572 protein interactors arranged by intensity similarity. Abundances for G601S and G965∗ variants in relation to WT KV11.1 were transformed into an Euclidian distance matrix and clustered using Ward’s minimum variance method. Each row represents an interactor with color indicating log2 fold change normalized to WT. B, swarm plots for all clusters depicting the log2 fold change normalized to WT for each variant and cluster. Statistical significance was calculated by ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. Bars represent mean ± SD. C–H, bar charts showing fold change compared to WT for individual genes within the top enriched protein GO term for each cluster. All samples were treated with vehicle (0.1%) for 24 h before sample collection. GO, gene ontology.

Cluster Analysis of trafficking-deficient KV11.1 interactomes.A, hierarchical clustering of 572 protein interactors arranged by intensity similarity. Abundances for G601S and G965∗ variants in relation to WT KV11.1 were transformed into an Euclidian distance matrix and clustered using Ward’s minimum variance method. Each row represents an interactor with color indicating log2 fold change normalized to WT. B, swarm plots for all clusters depicting the log2 fold change normalized to WT for each variant and cluster. Statistical significance was calculated by ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. Bars represent mean ± SD. C–H, bar charts showing fold change compared to WT for individual genes within the top enriched protein GO term for each cluster. All samples were treated with vehicle (0.1%) for 24 h before sample collection. GO, gene ontology.

### KV11.1 proteostasis network changes in response to pharmacological chaperone E-4031

We next explored how chaperone treatment with E-4031 alters interactions of trafficking-deficient variants. The potent KV11.1 channel inhibitor, E-4031, a methane sulfonamide class III antiarrhythmic similar to the United States Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs dofetilide and ibutilide, significantly enhances membrane trafficking of KV11.1 variants but not WT. Here, we show this by increased fully glycosylated KV11.1 protein (155 kD) after E-4031 treatment in the variants and an improved trafficking efficiency by comparison of the 155 kD band to total KV11.1 (Fig. 5, A and B). Reports have shown that most of the fully glycosylated protein resides on the cellular membrane due to its susceptibility to extracellular protease digestions (35). To confirm increased function in the channel variants, we measured currents with patch clamp electrophysiology. Treatment with E-4031 for 24 h significantly enhanced KV11.1 variant currents (Fig. 5, C–E), consistent with the increased membrane trafficking shown in Figure 5A. For WT, 24-h treatment with E-4031 reduced currents (Fig. 5D), indicating that the drug does not improve WT trafficking and the washout of drug is incomplete.Figure 5Impact of E-4031 on KV11.1 trafficking and function.A, Western blot depicting KV11.1 and variant protein expression in HEK293 cells in the absence or presence of E-4031 for 24 h. The truncated G965∗ has a lower molecular weight of ∼100 kD than 135 kD of full-length Kv11.1. B, bar graph illustrating KV11.1 trafficking efficiency quantified by the ratio of trafficked 155 kD glycosylated protein to total KV11.1 protein, including untrafficked 135 kD KV11.1 protein. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. All points are from biological replicates performed in two blots. C, representative KV11.1 current traces at −120 mV step from voltage-clamp experiments after 24-h treatment and washout. Inset: voltage-clamp protocol. KV11.1 current was quantified as the peak inward current upon repolarization to −120 mV (gray box). D, bar graph comparing WT KV11.1 currents after 24-h treatment and washout of vehicle or E-4031. Data analyzed with unpaired student’s t test. Each data point represents individual cells. E, bar graphs comparing WT KV11.1 current and two trafficking-deficient variants after 24-h treatment with washout. All experiments follow a 24-h treatment with vehicle (0.1% DMSO) or E-4031 (10 μM). Patch clamp experiments included a 30-min washout to remove residual E-4031. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Statistical significance was calculated by Kruskal–Wallis with post hoc Dunn’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001, ∗∗∗ = 0.0001. DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; HEK, human embryonic kidney.

Impact of E-4031 on KV11.1 trafficking and function.A, Western blot depicting KV11.1 and variant protein expression in HEK293 cells in the absence or presence of E-4031 for 24 h. The truncated G965∗ has a lower molecular weight of ∼100 kD than 135 kD of full-length Kv11.1. B, bar graph illustrating KV11.1 trafficking efficiency quantified by the ratio of trafficked 155 kD glycosylated protein to total KV11.1 protein, including untrafficked 135 kD KV11.1 protein. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. All points are from biological replicates performed in two blots. C, representative KV11.1 current traces at −120 mV step from voltage-clamp experiments after 24-h treatment and washout. Inset: voltage-clamp protocol. KV11.1 current was quantified as the peak inward current upon repolarization to −120 mV (gray box). D, bar graph comparing WT KV11.1 currents after 24-h treatment and washout of vehicle or E-4031. Data analyzed with unpaired student’s t test. Each data point represents individual cells. E, bar graphs comparing WT KV11.1 current and two trafficking-deficient variants after 24-h treatment with washout. All experiments follow a 24-h treatment with vehicle (0.1% DMSO) or E-4031 (10 μM). Patch clamp experiments included a 30-min washout to remove residual E-4031. Data are presented as mean ± SD. Statistical significance was calculated by Kruskal–Wallis with post hoc Dunn’s multiple comparisons test and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001, ∗∗∗ = 0.0001. DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; HEK, human embryonic kidney.

To date, little is known about the underlying mechanism of how E-4031 increases KV11.1 variant membrane trafficking and function. Therefore, we used our comparative interactome dataset for the two trafficking-deficient KV11.1 variants to evaluate which interactions were changed by E-4031 treatment. We found disparate responses for two variants. Globally, E-4031 altered protein interactions in the truncated variant G965∗ more than G601S (Fig. 6, A and B). There was a 22% reduction in mean log2 fold change/WT in the G965∗ variant compared to only 7.6% reduction in the G601S variant (log2 fold change 1.69–1.56 G601S and 1.04–0.81 G965∗). DAVID pathway analysis suggested that proteasomal proteins were significantly enriched in our dataset of KV11.1 interactors (Fig. 3B). Thus, we scrutinized manually curated GO terms related to proteasomal degradation from our data. Our data suggest that protein interactions with structural components of the PSM and ubiquitination were significantly reduced in both variants treated with E-4031 but more so in the G965∗ variant (Fig. 6, C and D). Manually annotated GO terms showed several individual proteins that had significant changes after E-4031 treatment in either variant (Fig. S4). Observing the top five protein interactions with the greatest change after E-4031 from ten separate GO terms highlighted some key interactions in different pathways (Fig. 6E). Together these data suggest several interactions significantly altered after E-4031 treatment.Figure 6Impact of chaperone treatment on protein interactions in trafficking-deficient KV11.1 variants.A, heatmap and (B) violin plots showing comparison of log2 fold changes over WT of 572 enriched protein interactions in trafficking-deficient variants G601S and G965∗, with or without 24-h E-4031 treatment. Statistical significance was calculated by paired two-tailed t test, and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. C and D, correlation of proteasomal degradation protein interactions for (C) G601S and (D) G965∗ in absence (x-axis) or presence (y-axis) of E-4031 (all log2 fold changes normalized to WT with DMSO). The black dotted line indicates the normal line with a slope of 1 and intercept at the origin. The orange error bars from each individual protein represent the SEM for vehicle (0.1% DMSO, horizontal) and E-4031 (10 μM, vertical). E, heatmap showing the top five interactions from ten manually annotated GO terms sorted by largest difference in log2 fold change/WT in absence or presence of E-4031 for 24 h. Only three proteins responsible for autophagy were enriched for KV11.1 interaction in our dataset. Cells were treated with either vehicle (0.1% DMSO) or E-4031 (10 μM) for 24 h before experiments. DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; GO, gene ontology.

Impact of chaperone treatment on protein interactions in trafficking-deficient KV11.1 variants.A, heatmap and (B) violin plots showing comparison of log2 fold changes over WT of 572 enriched protein interactions in trafficking-deficient variants G601S and G965∗, with or without 24-h E-4031 treatment. Statistical significance was calculated by paired two-tailed t test, and p values are depicted by ∗∗∗∗ < 0.0001. C and D, correlation of proteasomal degradation protein interactions for (C) G601S and (D) G965∗ in absence (x-axis) or presence (y-axis) of E-4031 (all log2 fold changes normalized to WT with DMSO). The black dotted line indicates the normal line with a slope of 1 and intercept at the origin. The orange error bars from each individual protein represent the SEM for vehicle (0.1% DMSO, horizontal) and E-4031 (10 μM, vertical). E, heatmap showing the top five interactions from ten manually annotated GO terms sorted by largest difference in log2 fold change/WT in absence or presence of E-4031 for 24 h. Only three proteins responsible for autophagy were enriched for KV11.1 interaction in our dataset. Cells were treated with either vehicle (0.1% DMSO) or E-4031 (10 μM) for 24 h before experiments. DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; GO, gene ontology.

The following individual interactors were significantly reduced in both variants after E-4031 treatment: part of the exocyst complex responsible for docking exocytic vesicles with fusion sites in the plasma membrane (EXOC7), the ER-associated degradation protein sel-1 homolog 1 (SEL1L), the E3 ubiquitin ligase listerin (LTN1) involved in ribosomal quality control, and lectin-based folding chaperones (CANX and ERLEC). Interactions reduced after E-4031 treatment specific to the G601S variant included the folding chaperone peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase (FKBP8), the BCL2-associated athanogene 6 (BAG6), and a subunit of the multipass translocon (CCDC47). Interactions reduced by E-4031 treatment specific to the G965∗ variant included small GTPases involved in membrane trafficking and vesicle transport (RAB10 and RAB9A) and a molecular chaperone in the BAG family (BAG3). Misfolded KV11.1 protein, unlike misfolded CFTR, has not been identified to aggregate in vitro. However, the interaction with BAG6, mainly in the full-length G601S variant, and formation of aggregates observed in purified KV11.1 protein indicate the potential aggregation of misfolded KV11.1 (6, 36, 37). We observed many proteins responsible for clathrin-dependent or clathrin-independent endocytosis that remained unchanged after E-4031 treatment (Fig. S5). These experiments highlighted the proteostasis network associated with KV11.1 and indicate that specific variants may exhibit differential responses to pharmacological treatment. Here, we have shown the remodeling of the proteostasis network is larger in the truncated variant (G965∗) even with lower interactions before treatment. The KV11.1 proteostasis network depicted here could guide the development of treatments that specifically target individual interacting elements to enhance function and alleviate LQTS caused by trafficking-deficient KV11.1 variants.

### Discussion

This study is the first to investigate the interactomes of trafficking-deficient KV11.1 variants and compare them to WT KV11.1 using AP-MS coupled with TMT labeling. Through this approach, we identified several proteins already known to interact with KV11.1, such as the E3 ubiquitin ligase (NEDD4L), the four-and-a-half LIM domains protein 2 (FHL2), the lectin-based folding chaperone calnexin (CANX), caveolin 1 (CAV1), and the 14-3-3ε protein (YWHAE) (26, 27, 38, 39, 40, 41). The truncated variant interaction with 14-3-3ε was reduced compared to either WT or the full-length KV11.1-G601S variant, consistent with previous work that suggests 14-3-3ε interacts with the C-terminal domain (39). KV11.1, a glyocoprotein, undergoes N-linked glycosylation at the N598 residue, and mutations at this site were shown to influence channel stability (42). We identified several proteins involved in glycosylation or glycoprotein folding: protein glucosyltransferases (DDOST and RPN2), lectin based chaperones (ERLEC and CANX), and glucosidases (MOGS and GANAB). We also identified protein interactions that have not been previously reported such as the estradiol 17-beta hydoxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD17B12), the BCL2-associated athanogene (BAG6), and mitochondrial membrane–associated or solute carrier proteins (TOMM40, TOMM70, TOMM22, TIMM50, TRAP1, SLC25A10, SLC25A13, SLC25A24, SLC25A3). Several mitochondrial proteins were found to interact with gamma-aminobutyric acid type A channels as well and warrant further exploration into possible functional roles on KV11.1 biogenesis (25). The interaction with HSD17B12, which converts estrone to estradiol, could be particularly significant given that female sex hormones increase the risk of LQTS-related arrhythmias (43, 44). Several other 17-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases localize in the ER membrane, and the catalytic site of HSD17B12 was found facing the ER lumen (45). Thus, this interaction could have early effects on KV11.1 folding within the ER.

E-4031 improves the trafficking efficiency of KV11.1 variants and our data show an associated decrease in protein interactions after treatment in KV11.1 variants. The trafficking efficiency appears to be restored to WT levels from our immunoblot data. However, the patch clamp data implied that the function was not restored to WT possibly due to incomplete washout of E-4031 or altered gating due to the channel variants. While the direct mechanism of E-4031 remains unidentified, we discovered numerous protein interactions that are altered with E-4031 treatment and could be therapeutically targeted. Several studies have demonstrated that knockdown via siRNA or overexpression of folding proteins can improve the trafficking and function of KV11.1 variants (46, 47, 48, 49). Experiments of this nature hold significance not only for KV11.1 but also in the context of cystic fibrosis, where research has revealed several protein interactions that could be modulated to enhance CFTR trafficking (14, 15). Similarly, other ion channel trafficking disorders present promising protein interaction targets (50, 51, 52). An alternative strategy for enhancing protein trafficking involves the reduction of incubation temperature. While this may not be a therapeutically feasible solution, it could illuminate potential changes within the proteostasis network that warrant further investigation. This approach underscores the possibility of identifying novel avenues for therapeutic intervention. Continued research in these domains may not only yield novel treatments for KV11.1-associated conditions but also benefit a broader spectrum of ion channel trafficking disorders.

An important limitation of this study was the use of HEK293 cells, which differ considerably from native cardiomyocytes and do not express all proteins and channels present in a cardiomyocyte. For instance, we expressed KV11.1 as the 1a isoform in cells. Native cardiomyocytes express a mixture of KV11.1-1a and an isoform KV11.1-1b with a shorter N terminus. Notably, the KV11.1-1b isoform does not traffic properly without KV11.1-1a, which could alter overall protein interactions. Nonetheless, HEK293 cells are a commonly employed model cell line to study the secretory pathway, and they have been able to recapitulate many of the native proteostasis interactions of other membrane proteins (14, 25, 53). To overcome this limitation, future investigations could use human-induced pluripotent stem cell cardiomyocytes to identify protein interactions in a more native-like cell type. Another limitation of our study is that known interactors did not show significant enrichment in KV11.1 pull-down samples, such as the heat-shock protein 70 family. We identified several heat-shock protein 70 family member proteins (HSPA-1A/4/4L/5/6/8) but these were not enriched compared to untransfected cells (28). This suggests that our MS samples may contain false negatives due to substantial protein abundance in the untransfected mock IP samples, as has been seen in the contaminant repository for affinity purification (CRAPome) (54). Lastly, our study focused on pharmacological chaperone treatment of KV11.1 variants. Further exploration into this mechanism as well as temperature correction will advance our understanding of KV11.1 trafficking.

Our data suggest that E-4031 does not improve the trafficking efficiency of WT, implying a potential saturation in the channel’s trafficking rate. Furthermore, E-4031 does not appear to reduce degradation of the WT channel nor modify specific protein interactions responsible for internalization of KV11.1 variants. This observation is supported by the lack of change in protein interactions associated with clathrin-mediated internalization (SPIRE1 and phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein) and nonclathrin-mediated endocytosis (CAV1, CAVIN1, and SPTBN2) (Fig. S5). As such, E-4031 may predominantly promote the forward trafficking of KV11.1 variants, exerting minimal influence on their endocytosis. The plasma surface half-life of KV11.1 variants is shorter than WT, suggesting an alternative therapeutic strategy targeting plasma membrane stabilization could be explored (55, 56). Clathrin-mediated endocytosis has not been found as a major mechanism of KV11.1 internalization, but caveolin and NEDD4L are thought to mediate internalization during extracellular potassium depletion (38). We identified several E3 ubiquitin ligases that were not previously known to interact with KV11.1, including UBE2C, LTN1, ITCH, TRIP12, UBR3, MIB1, and CUL3. This evidence suggests that E3 ubiquitin ligases could play a large role in channel turnover, particularly at the plasma membrane and targeting these interactions could further improve KV11.1 function.

Our findings indicate that removal of the ER retention motif and C-terminal domain could alter protein interactions responsible for the trafficking of KV11.1 channels. It is plausible that the ER retention motif, RXR (residues 1005–1007) could be therapeutically targeted to increase trafficking. Others reported that truncated KV11.1 variants with the ER retention domain intact have no functional current, which was correctable upon deletion or treatment with a peptide spanning the domain (57). In our study, we found that the truncated variant displayed smaller interactome differences compared to WT protein than the full-length variant. Our dataset highlighted the proteasomal degradation pathway, suggesting that KV11.1 protein and variants are primarily degraded by the PSM as opposed to lysosomal degradation. Many of the protein interactions linked to proteasomal degradation were decreased after E-4031 treatment; further supporting this pathway could be a target for intervention.

In conclusion, we have for the first time defined the protein interactomes of KV11.1, two of its trafficking-deficient variants, and the effect of a pharmacological chaperone (E-4031) on the protein interaction network. Future research will elucidate functional implications of specific protein–protein interactions identified in this study and clarify which interactions could become relevant targets for therapeutic strategies in LQTS.

### Experimental procedures

A detailed method for the generation of HEK293 cell lines expressing WT KV11.1, KV11.1-G601S, and KV11.1-G601S-G965∗ as well as cell culture conditions is previously published (23). The KV11.1-G601S-G965∗ cell line was specifically optimized for Tl+-flux assays, expresses the trafficking deficient variant G601S, and removes the ER retention motif with an early truncation and addition of 17 amino acids after the amino acid G965. All HEK293 cells were cultured in media consisting of minimum essential media containing 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (Gibco), and 1% glutamax (Gibco). All cells were between passage numbers 3 and 30 for experiments.

HEK293 cells were cultured to full confluence in flasks ranging from 75 to 225 cm2. All cells were treated with either 0.1% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or 10 μM E-4031 for 24 h. The cells were washed with Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS, Gibco) without calcium and magnesium. DPBS was removed and 750 μl of ice-cold lysis buffer was added containing 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Igepal-CA-630 (Tris, NaCl, igepal-CA-630 buffer) and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). The flasks were agitated on an orbital shaker for 30 min. Cell lysates were scraped from flasks into 1.7 ml Eppendorf tubes and sonicated with probe sonication (Qsonica) at 10 W for five sequences of 3-s bursts, separated by 7-s pause while samples were kept on ice. After sonication, samples were centrifuged at 18,000g for 30 min at 4 °C. Supernatant was collected postcentrifugation, and pellets were discarded. Finally, the protein concentration was quantified using a bicinchoninic acid assay.

Next, 10 mg of lysate representing one biological replicate was incubated for 2 h at 4 °C with anti-Kv11.1 antibody (Cell Signaling #12889) covalently coupled to protein A/G magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The antibody-to-lysate ratio was maintained at 0.1 μg of antibody to 100 μg lysate. Following co-IP in 15 ml centrifuge tubes, complexes were transferred to 1.7 ml Eppendorf tubes. Samples were washed three times (250 μl) with a buffer containing 25 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA (TN buffer). A magnetic stand was used to separate bead-Kv11.1 protein interactions from the rest of the lysate. After the final wash, all media was removed and antibody-bead/coimmunoprecipitated protein mixture was placed in a −80 °C freezer for 1 h to facilitate later elution.

For elution, 50 μl of 0.2 M glycine (pH 2.3) buffer was added, and the sample was heated on a heating block (70 °C) for 10 min. Sample was collected by separating magnetic beads from eluate and then neutralized by adding 5 μl ammonium bicarbonate (1 M). Samples were stored at −80 °C until proceeding to either Western blotting, total membrane staining, or LC-MS/MS analysis.

Eluted samples were precipitated in methanol/chloroform, washed three times with methanol, and air-dried. Protein pellets were then resuspended in 4 μl 1% Rapigest SF Surfactant (Waters), followed by the addition of 10 μl of 50 mM Hepes, pH 8.0, and 32.5 μl of LC-MS grade water. Samples were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma) and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). Next, 0.5 μg of trypsin (Sequencing Grade, Promega, or Pierce) was added and incubated for 16 to 18 h at 37 °C with shaking at 700 rpm. Peptide samples were then reacted with TMT 16/18-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 40% vol/vol acetonitrile and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Reactions were then quenched by the addition of ammonium bicarbonate (0.4% wt/vol final concentration) and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. TMT-labeled samples for a given MS run were then pooled and acidified with 5% formic acid (Sigma, vol/vol). Samples were concentrated using a SpeedVac and resuspended in buffer A (95% water, 4.9% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid, v/v/v). Cleaved Rapigest SF surfactant was removed by centrifugation for 30 min at 21,100g.

LC-MS/MS data-dependent analysis was performed using an Exploris480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were loaded using a high-pressure chamber onto a triphasic MudPIT column (prepared as described previously) (22). Briefly, the multidimensional protein identification technology (MudPIT) column was packed with 1.5 cm of Aqua 5 μm C18 resin (Phenomenex # 04A-4299), 1.5 cm Luna 5 μm strong cation exchange (SCX) resin (Phenomenex # 04A-4398), and 1.5 cm 5 μm C18 resin. Before analysis, the peptide loaded MudPIT column was desalted with buffer A (95% water, 4.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid v/v/v) for 30 min. Peptides were eluted from the first C18 phase onto the SCX resin using a 10 μl injection of buffer A with the following 90-min gradient: 2% B (5-min hold) ramped to a mobile phase concentration of 40% B over 35 min, ramped to 80% B over 15 min, held at 80% B for 5 min, and then returned to 2% B in 5 min and then held at 2% B for the remainder of the analysis at a constant flow rate 500 nl/min. Peptides were then sequentially eluted from the SCX stationary phase using 10 μl injections of 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100% buffer C (500 mM ammonium acetate in buffer A) in buffer A. The final fraction was eluted with 10% buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid v/v) and 90% buffer C. Fractions were collected using the following 130-min gradient with a constant flow rate of 500 nl/min: 2% B (6-min hold) stepped to 5% B over 2 min, ramped to 35% B over 92 min and stepped to 85% in 6 min and held 85% B for 7 min, followed by a 17-min hold at 2% B. For both gradients, the loading pump was held at 2% B for the duration of the analysis. During buffer pickup and loading for each method, the loading pump was held at a flow rate of 10 μl/min for 8 min prior to the valve switch. Five minutes before the end of the analytical gradient the valve was switched to the load position to prepare for sample loading and the flow rate was adjusted from 1 μl/minute to 10 μl/minute for the remainder of the analysis. Peptides were separated using a 20 cm fused silica microcapillary column (ID 100 μm) ending with a laser-pulled tip filled with Aqua C18, 3 μm, 100 Å resin (Phenomenex # 04A-4311). Electrospray ionization was performed directly from the analytical column by applying a voltage of 2.2 kV with an MS inlet capillary temperature of 275 °C and a RF lens of 40%.

For TMT-data-dependent analysis acquisition, a 3 s duty cycle was utilized consisting of a full scan (375–1500 m/z, 120,000 resolution) and subsequent tandem mass (MS/MS) spectra collected in TopSpeed acquisition mode. For MS1 scans, the maximum injection time was set to automatic with a normalized automatic gain control target of 300%. Only ions with an MS1 intensity above 5e3 with a charge state between 2 and 7 were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Additionally, a dynamic exclusion time of 45 s was utilized (determined from peptide elution profiles) with a mass tolerance of ± 10 ppm to maximize peptide identifications. MS/MS spectra were collected with a normalized higher energy collisional dissociation of 36, 0.7 m/z isolation window, 150 ms maximum injection time, a normalized automatic gain control target of 200%, at a MS2 orbitrap resolution of 45,000 with a defined first mass of 110 m/z to ensure measurement of TMTPro reporter ions.

Peptide identification and TMT-based protein quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, https://www.thermofisher.com/us/en/home/industrial/mass-spectrometry/liquid-chromatography-mass-spectrometry-lc-ms/lc-ms-software/multi-omics-data-analysis/proteome-discoverer-software.html). MS/MS spectra were searched using SEQUEST-HT against a UniProt human proteome database (released 03/2014 and containing 20,337 entries; supplemented with common MS contaminants and curated to remove redundant proteins/splice isoforms) and a decoy database of reversed peptide sequences. Searches were carried out according to the following parameters: 20 ppm peptide precursor tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, minimum peptide length of 6 AAs, trypsin cleavage with a maximum of two missed cleavages, dynamic modifications of Met oxidation (+15.995 Da), protein N-terminal Met loss (−131.040 Da), protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da), protein N-terminal Met loss and acetylation (+89.030), and static modifications of Cys carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da), and TMTPro (N terminus/Lys, + 304.207 Da). IDs were filtered using Percolator with a peptide level FDR of 1%. The reporter ion quantification node in PD was used to quantify TMT reporter ion intensities. Only reporter ions with an average signal-to-noise ratio greater than 10 to 1 (10:1) and a percent co-isolation less than 25 were utilized for quantification. TMT reporter ion intensities were summed for peptides belonging to the same protein, including razor peptides. Proteins were filtered at 1% FDR and protein grouping was performed according to the parsimony principle. Protein identifications and TMT quantification can be found in Table S1.

Protein abundances for all channels within each MS run were median normalized (N = 4 runs). The median normalized quantifications are included in Table S1. To determine KV11.1 enriched interactions, data were log2 normalized and each protein pulled down with KV11.1 was compared to the corresponding log2 TMT intensity for each protein pulled down in untransfected cells. Significance was determined using multiple t-tests with FDR correction by Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli (q < 0.05). For subsequent analysis, we scaled log2 protein abundances to the KV11.1 protein within that channel. We then scaled the log2 protein abundances to the respective protein in WT KV11.1 samples from the same MS run for a common reference point. The individual replicates from separate runs were compiled and averaged to result in the log2 fold change for each protein compared to quantified interaction in WT KV11.1 samples (log2 fold change/WT). We only included proteins identified and quantified in both mutant variants from the MS runs.

This procedure was adapted from Pankow, et al. (58) pierce protein A/G magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing a recombinant protein A/G (∼50,500 kDa) that combines the IgG-binding domain of both protein A and protein G were used to cross-link anti-Kv11.1 antibodies (Cell Signaling). Stock beads with a concentration of 10 mg/ml were washed four times with 10 volumes of DPBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Excess DPBS was removed, followed by the addition of an appropriate amount of anti-Kv11.1 antibodies to the beads to make the final concentration antibody/bead of 60 μg/100 μl, which is equivalent to 42.8 μl of antibody per 100 μl of stock beads. Then, the antibody and beads were gently mixed for 2 h at room temperature (20–25 °C) on a rotator to allow the binding of the antibody to the beads. Next, the beads were pulled with a magnetic stand and washed twice with 1 ml of freshly made 100 mM sodium borate (pH 9.0, Sigma-Aldrich). To start the cross-linking reaction, beads were resuspended in 1 ml of 100 mM sodium borate (pH 9.0), followed by the addition of dimethylpimelimidate powder (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a final dimethylpimelimidate powder concentration of 25 mM. The bead-antibody mixture was rotated for 30 min at room temperature on a rotator, and then the beads were pulled with a magnetic stand and the supernatant was discarded. After that, beads were washed once with 1 ml of 200 mM newly prepared ethanolamine (pH 8.0) (Sigma-Aldrich), resuspended in 1 ml of 200 mM ethanolamine, and incubated for 2 h at room temperature with gentle mixing. Finally, beads were washed five times with 1 ml of DPBS to remove excess ethanolamine and stored in DPBS with 0.1% Tween-20 (v/v) (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.02% sodium azide (wt/vol) (Sigma-Aldrich).

Biological processes of KV11.1 protein interactors were analyzed using DAVID (34, 59). Gene symbols were converted to ENTREZ gene IDs and submitted in list format. Enriched GO terms were picked from the biological process direct terms with FDR correction with adaptive linear step-up adjusted p values as discussed in Benjamini and Hochberg (q < 0.05) (60).

Increased KV11.1 variant trafficking is observed on a Western blot by an increased proportion of trafficked, fully glycosylated (∼155 kD) protein compared to the untrafficked, core glycosylated (∼135 kD) protein. HEK293 cells were cultured in 6-well plates in the presence of vehicle (0.1% DMSO) or E-4031 (10 μM) for 24 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Cells were lifted using TrypLE express (Thermo Fisher Scientific), centrifuged, pelleted, and lysed with 100 μl Tris, NaCl, igepal-CA-630 buffer for 30 min at 4 °C. Samples were centrifuged at 18,000g (4 °C) for 30 min to remove insoluble material. The supernatant was then quantified using bicinchoninic acid reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

Fifteen micrograms of protein were loaded into individual wells of a 4 to 20% Tris-glycine eXtended (BioRad) precast gradient gel and run at 50 V for 30 min to resolve the stacking layer and then 150 V for 1.5 h. The gel was transferred to a 0.45 μm polyvinylidene fluoride membrane and blocked for 1 h with 5% (wt/vol) molecular-grade nonfat milk. Primary anti-KV11.1 antibody (Cell Signaling, 1:2000) was incubated 16 h at 4 °C. Then membranes were incubated with secondary anti-rabbit IgG horse radish peroxidase (Promega, 1:5000) for 1 h. Membranes were incubated for 1 min using SuperSignal West Pico PLUS Chemiluminescent Substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and imaged with an iBright 1500 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Images were analyzed using ImageJ software (https://imagej.net/ij/download.html) and the square selection tool to calculate the density of respective bands with the same area.

Patch clamp electrophysiology of HEK293 cells was performed as previously described (61). KV11.1 current was measured in HEK293 cells by whole-cell, patch-clamp electrophysiology using a Multiclamp 700A amplifier (Axon Instruments), Digidata 1322A analog-to-digital converter (Axon Instruments), and TE200 microscope (Nikon). A total of 15,000 cells were plated on 35 mm dishes with 20 mm glass-bottom wells (Cellvis D35-20-1.5-N). Cells were cultured a minimum of 2 days in a 37 °C incubator with 5% CO2. Cells were treated with either vehicle (0.1% DMSO) or E-4031 (10 μM) for 24 h before experiments. External patch-clamp solution contained (in mmol/L) NaCl 137, KCl 4, CaCl2 1.8, MgCl2 1, glucose 10, and Hepes 10 (pH 7.4 using NaOH). Internal solution contained (in mmol/L) KCl 137, MgCl2 1, EGTA 5, Hepes 10, and MgATP 5 (pH 7.2 using KOH). Glass capillaries (World Precision Instruments) were pulled to 1.5 to 3.5 MΩ internal resistance. Prior to recordings, cells were perfused with external patch solution (2.5–4 ml/min) for 30 min at 30 °C to remove residual drug. Recordings from single, isolated cells were performed at room temperature (∼23–24 °C).

Hierarchical clustering of the 572 significant KV11.1 interactions from the master list was performed using a custom R script. Briefly, the WT KV11.1 normalized abundances were converted to an Euclidian distance matrix and clustered using Ward’s minimum variant method.

Where appropriate unpaired student’s t test, ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons and Kruskal–Wallis with post hoc Dunn’s multiple comparisons were performed. To assess whether data were parametric or not, we used the Shapiro–Wilk test for data with multiple samples. Outliers were removed from patch clamp electrophysiology data using the robust regression and outlier removal test with Q = 5%. All statistical tests were performed in GraphPad Prism (https://www.graphpad.com/).

### HEK293 cell lines

A detailed method for the generation of HEK293 cell lines expressing WT KV11.1, KV11.1-G601S, and KV11.1-G601S-G965∗ as well as cell culture conditions is previously published (23). The KV11.1-G601S-G965∗ cell line was specifically optimized for Tl+-flux assays, expresses the trafficking deficient variant G601S, and removes the ER retention motif with an early truncation and addition of 17 amino acids after the amino acid G965. All HEK293 cells were cultured in media consisting of minimum essential media containing 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (Gibco), and 1% glutamax (Gibco). All cells were between passage numbers 3 and 30 for experiments.

### Co-IP (affinity purification)

HEK293 cells were cultured to full confluence in flasks ranging from 75 to 225 cm2. All cells were treated with either 0.1% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or 10 μM E-4031 for 24 h. The cells were washed with Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS, Gibco) without calcium and magnesium. DPBS was removed and 750 μl of ice-cold lysis buffer was added containing 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Igepal-CA-630 (Tris, NaCl, igepal-CA-630 buffer) and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). The flasks were agitated on an orbital shaker for 30 min. Cell lysates were scraped from flasks into 1.7 ml Eppendorf tubes and sonicated with probe sonication (Qsonica) at 10 W for five sequences of 3-s bursts, separated by 7-s pause while samples were kept on ice. After sonication, samples were centrifuged at 18,000g for 30 min at 4 °C. Supernatant was collected postcentrifugation, and pellets were discarded. Finally, the protein concentration was quantified using a bicinchoninic acid assay.

Next, 10 mg of lysate representing one biological replicate was incubated for 2 h at 4 °C with anti-Kv11.1 antibody (Cell Signaling #12889) covalently coupled to protein A/G magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The antibody-to-lysate ratio was maintained at 0.1 μg of antibody to 100 μg lysate. Following co-IP in 15 ml centrifuge tubes, complexes were transferred to 1.7 ml Eppendorf tubes. Samples were washed three times (250 μl) with a buffer containing 25 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA (TN buffer). A magnetic stand was used to separate bead-Kv11.1 protein interactions from the rest of the lysate. After the final wash, all media was removed and antibody-bead/coimmunoprecipitated protein mixture was placed in a −80 °C freezer for 1 h to facilitate later elution.

For elution, 50 μl of 0.2 M glycine (pH 2.3) buffer was added, and the sample was heated on a heating block (70 °C) for 10 min. Sample was collected by separating magnetic beads from eluate and then neutralized by adding 5 μl ammonium bicarbonate (1 M). Samples were stored at −80 °C until proceeding to either Western blotting, total membrane staining, or LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Protein digestion and TMT labeling

Eluted samples were precipitated in methanol/chloroform, washed three times with methanol, and air-dried. Protein pellets were then resuspended in 4 μl 1% Rapigest SF Surfactant (Waters), followed by the addition of 10 μl of 50 mM Hepes, pH 8.0, and 32.5 μl of LC-MS grade water. Samples were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma) and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). Next, 0.5 μg of trypsin (Sequencing Grade, Promega, or Pierce) was added and incubated for 16 to 18 h at 37 °C with shaking at 700 rpm. Peptide samples were then reacted with TMT 16/18-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 40% vol/vol acetonitrile and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Reactions were then quenched by the addition of ammonium bicarbonate (0.4% wt/vol final concentration) and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. TMT-labeled samples for a given MS run were then pooled and acidified with 5% formic acid (Sigma, vol/vol). Samples were concentrated using a SpeedVac and resuspended in buffer A (95% water, 4.9% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid, v/v/v). Cleaved Rapigest SF surfactant was removed by centrifugation for 30 min at 21,100g.

### MudPIT LC-MS/MS analysis

LC-MS/MS data-dependent analysis was performed using an Exploris480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were loaded using a high-pressure chamber onto a triphasic MudPIT column (prepared as described previously) (22). Briefly, the multidimensional protein identification technology (MudPIT) column was packed with 1.5 cm of Aqua 5 μm C18 resin (Phenomenex # 04A-4299), 1.5 cm Luna 5 μm strong cation exchange (SCX) resin (Phenomenex # 04A-4398), and 1.5 cm 5 μm C18 resin. Before analysis, the peptide loaded MudPIT column was desalted with buffer A (95% water, 4.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid v/v/v) for 30 min. Peptides were eluted from the first C18 phase onto the SCX resin using a 10 μl injection of buffer A with the following 90-min gradient: 2% B (5-min hold) ramped to a mobile phase concentration of 40% B over 35 min, ramped to 80% B over 15 min, held at 80% B for 5 min, and then returned to 2% B in 5 min and then held at 2% B for the remainder of the analysis at a constant flow rate 500 nl/min. Peptides were then sequentially eluted from the SCX stationary phase using 10 μl injections of 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100% buffer C (500 mM ammonium acetate in buffer A) in buffer A. The final fraction was eluted with 10% buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid v/v) and 90% buffer C. Fractions were collected using the following 130-min gradient with a constant flow rate of 500 nl/min: 2% B (6-min hold) stepped to 5% B over 2 min, ramped to 35% B over 92 min and stepped to 85% in 6 min and held 85% B for 7 min, followed by a 17-min hold at 2% B. For both gradients, the loading pump was held at 2% B for the duration of the analysis. During buffer pickup and loading for each method, the loading pump was held at a flow rate of 10 μl/min for 8 min prior to the valve switch. Five minutes before the end of the analytical gradient the valve was switched to the load position to prepare for sample loading and the flow rate was adjusted from 1 μl/minute to 10 μl/minute for the remainder of the analysis. Peptides were separated using a 20 cm fused silica microcapillary column (ID 100 μm) ending with a laser-pulled tip filled with Aqua C18, 3 μm, 100 Å resin (Phenomenex # 04A-4311). Electrospray ionization was performed directly from the analytical column by applying a voltage of 2.2 kV with an MS inlet capillary temperature of 275 °C and a RF lens of 40%.

For TMT-data-dependent analysis acquisition, a 3 s duty cycle was utilized consisting of a full scan (375–1500 m/z, 120,000 resolution) and subsequent tandem mass (MS/MS) spectra collected in TopSpeed acquisition mode. For MS1 scans, the maximum injection time was set to automatic with a normalized automatic gain control target of 300%. Only ions with an MS1 intensity above 5e3 with a charge state between 2 and 7 were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Additionally, a dynamic exclusion time of 45 s was utilized (determined from peptide elution profiles) with a mass tolerance of ± 10 ppm to maximize peptide identifications. MS/MS spectra were collected with a normalized higher energy collisional dissociation of 36, 0.7 m/z isolation window, 150 ms maximum injection time, a normalized automatic gain control target of 200%, at a MS2 orbitrap resolution of 45,000 with a defined first mass of 110 m/z to ensure measurement of TMTPro reporter ions.

### Peptide identification and quantification

Peptide identification and TMT-based protein quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, https://www.thermofisher.com/us/en/home/industrial/mass-spectrometry/liquid-chromatography-mass-spectrometry-lc-ms/lc-ms-software/multi-omics-data-analysis/proteome-discoverer-software.html). MS/MS spectra were searched using SEQUEST-HT against a UniProt human proteome database (released 03/2014 and containing 20,337 entries; supplemented with common MS contaminants and curated to remove redundant proteins/splice isoforms) and a decoy database of reversed peptide sequences. Searches were carried out according to the following parameters: 20 ppm peptide precursor tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, minimum peptide length of 6 AAs, trypsin cleavage with a maximum of two missed cleavages, dynamic modifications of Met oxidation (+15.995 Da), protein N-terminal Met loss (−131.040 Da), protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da), protein N-terminal Met loss and acetylation (+89.030), and static modifications of Cys carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da), and TMTPro (N terminus/Lys, + 304.207 Da). IDs were filtered using Percolator with a peptide level FDR of 1%. The reporter ion quantification node in PD was used to quantify TMT reporter ion intensities. Only reporter ions with an average signal-to-noise ratio greater than 10 to 1 (10:1) and a percent co-isolation less than 25 were utilized for quantification. TMT reporter ion intensities were summed for peptides belonging to the same protein, including razor peptides. Proteins were filtered at 1% FDR and protein grouping was performed according to the parsimony principle. Protein identifications and TMT quantification can be found in Table S1.

### Proteomics analysis

Protein abundances for all channels within each MS run were median normalized (N = 4 runs). The median normalized quantifications are included in Table S1. To determine KV11.1 enriched interactions, data were log2 normalized and each protein pulled down with KV11.1 was compared to the corresponding log2 TMT intensity for each protein pulled down in untransfected cells. Significance was determined using multiple t-tests with FDR correction by Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli (q < 0.05). For subsequent analysis, we scaled log2 protein abundances to the KV11.1 protein within that channel. We then scaled the log2 protein abundances to the respective protein in WT KV11.1 samples from the same MS run for a common reference point. The individual replicates from separate runs were compiled and averaged to result in the log2 fold change for each protein compared to quantified interaction in WT KV11.1 samples (log2 fold change/WT). We only included proteins identified and quantified in both mutant variants from the MS runs.

### Covalent antibody-bead cross-linking

This procedure was adapted from Pankow, et al. (58) pierce protein A/G magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing a recombinant protein A/G (∼50,500 kDa) that combines the IgG-binding domain of both protein A and protein G were used to cross-link anti-Kv11.1 antibodies (Cell Signaling). Stock beads with a concentration of 10 mg/ml were washed four times with 10 volumes of DPBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Excess DPBS was removed, followed by the addition of an appropriate amount of anti-Kv11.1 antibodies to the beads to make the final concentration antibody/bead of 60 μg/100 μl, which is equivalent to 42.8 μl of antibody per 100 μl of stock beads. Then, the antibody and beads were gently mixed for 2 h at room temperature (20–25 °C) on a rotator to allow the binding of the antibody to the beads. Next, the beads were pulled with a magnetic stand and washed twice with 1 ml of freshly made 100 mM sodium borate (pH 9.0, Sigma-Aldrich). To start the cross-linking reaction, beads were resuspended in 1 ml of 100 mM sodium borate (pH 9.0), followed by the addition of dimethylpimelimidate powder (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a final dimethylpimelimidate powder concentration of 25 mM. The bead-antibody mixture was rotated for 30 min at room temperature on a rotator, and then the beads were pulled with a magnetic stand and the supernatant was discarded. After that, beads were washed once with 1 ml of 200 mM newly prepared ethanolamine (pH 8.0) (Sigma-Aldrich), resuspended in 1 ml of 200 mM ethanolamine, and incubated for 2 h at room temperature with gentle mixing. Finally, beads were washed five times with 1 ml of DPBS to remove excess ethanolamine and stored in DPBS with 0.1% Tween-20 (v/v) (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.02% sodium azide (wt/vol) (Sigma-Aldrich).

### GO analysis

Biological processes of KV11.1 protein interactors were analyzed using DAVID (34, 59). Gene symbols were converted to ENTREZ gene IDs and submitted in list format. Enriched GO terms were picked from the biological process direct terms with FDR correction with adaptive linear step-up adjusted p values as discussed in Benjamini and Hochberg (q < 0.05) (60).

### Immunoblots (trafficking efficiency)

Increased KV11.1 variant trafficking is observed on a Western blot by an increased proportion of trafficked, fully glycosylated (∼155 kD) protein compared to the untrafficked, core glycosylated (∼135 kD) protein. HEK293 cells were cultured in 6-well plates in the presence of vehicle (0.1% DMSO) or E-4031 (10 μM) for 24 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Cells were lifted using TrypLE express (Thermo Fisher Scientific), centrifuged, pelleted, and lysed with 100 μl Tris, NaCl, igepal-CA-630 buffer for 30 min at 4 °C. Samples were centrifuged at 18,000g (4 °C) for 30 min to remove insoluble material. The supernatant was then quantified using bicinchoninic acid reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

Fifteen micrograms of protein were loaded into individual wells of a 4 to 20% Tris-glycine eXtended (BioRad) precast gradient gel and run at 50 V for 30 min to resolve the stacking layer and then 150 V for 1.5 h. The gel was transferred to a 0.45 μm polyvinylidene fluoride membrane and blocked for 1 h with 5% (wt/vol) molecular-grade nonfat milk. Primary anti-KV11.1 antibody (Cell Signaling, 1:2000) was incubated 16 h at 4 °C. Then membranes were incubated with secondary anti-rabbit IgG horse radish peroxidase (Promega, 1:5000) for 1 h. Membranes were incubated for 1 min using SuperSignal West Pico PLUS Chemiluminescent Substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and imaged with an iBright 1500 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Images were analyzed using ImageJ software (https://imagej.net/ij/download.html) and the square selection tool to calculate the density of respective bands with the same area.

### Patch clamp electrophysiology (KV11.1 function)

Patch clamp electrophysiology of HEK293 cells was performed as previously described (61). KV11.1 current was measured in HEK293 cells by whole-cell, patch-clamp electrophysiology using a Multiclamp 700A amplifier (Axon Instruments), Digidata 1322A analog-to-digital converter (Axon Instruments), and TE200 microscope (Nikon). A total of 15,000 cells were plated on 35 mm dishes with 20 mm glass-bottom wells (Cellvis D35-20-1.5-N). Cells were cultured a minimum of 2 days in a 37 °C incubator with 5% CO2. Cells were treated with either vehicle (0.1% DMSO) or E-4031 (10 μM) for 24 h before experiments. External patch-clamp solution contained (in mmol/L) NaCl 137, KCl 4, CaCl2 1.8, MgCl2 1, glucose 10, and Hepes 10 (pH 7.4 using NaOH). Internal solution contained (in mmol/L) KCl 137, MgCl2 1, EGTA 5, Hepes 10, and MgATP 5 (pH 7.2 using KOH). Glass capillaries (World Precision Instruments) were pulled to 1.5 to 3.5 MΩ internal resistance. Prior to recordings, cells were perfused with external patch solution (2.5–4 ml/min) for 30 min at 30 °C to remove residual drug. Recordings from single, isolated cells were performed at room temperature (∼23–24 °C).

### Hierarchical clustering

Hierarchical clustering of the 572 significant KV11.1 interactions from the master list was performed using a custom R script. Briefly, the WT KV11.1 normalized abundances were converted to an Euclidian distance matrix and clustered using Ward’s minimum variant method.

### Statistical analysis

Where appropriate unpaired student’s t test, ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons and Kruskal–Wallis with post hoc Dunn’s multiple comparisons were performed. To assess whether data were parametric or not, we used the Shapiro–Wilk test for data with multiple samples. Outliers were removed from patch clamp electrophysiology data using the robust regression and outlier removal test with Q = 5%. All statistical tests were performed in GraphPad Prism (https://www.graphpad.com/).

### Data availability

Mass spectrometry data associated with our manuscript has been deposited to ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD050914.

### Supporting information

This article contains supporting information.

### Conflict of interest

The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.



# SUPPLEMENTAL FILE 1: main.pdf

# Preparing to download ...

[HHS Vulnerability Disclosure](https://www.hhs.gov/vulnerability-disclosure-policy/index.html)

# SUPPLEMENTAL FILE 2: PMC11284683

[File available at: kcnH2_run/KCNH2/20251126_134514/pmc_fulltext/38876300_supplements/PMC11284683]

